
|P_
ESSAYS
ON THE 
HEPATITIS
AND 
SPASMODIC AFFECTIONS
IN INDIA. 

[Price Two Shillings.] 

|P_
TO 
THE HONOURABLE 
THE COURT OF DIRECTORS
OF THE HONOURABLE 
THE UNITED EAST INDIA COMPANY, 
THE TWO FOLLOWING 
ESSAYS 
ARE HUMBLY INSCRIBED, 
BY THEIR OBEDIENT SERVANT, 
The AUTHOR. 

|P_
[}PREFACE. }]
THE British possessions in India are 
now become so extensive as to require 
for their defence a numerous body of our 
countrymen; many of whom, from the in-
fluence of a new and injurious climate, as 
well as other unfavourable changes, fall 
victims to the consequences of emigration. 
The prevention of this fatality may, in some 
cases, exceed the utmost efforts of medicine; 
but it is certain that in others, and those by 
far the greatest number, the operation of the 
causes above-mentioned prove chiefly delete-
rious from the imperfect knowledge hitherto 
attained of the nature of diseases in India. 
Among those to which Europeans are parti-
cularly exposed, the most common, and 
perhaps likewise the most fatal, is the He-
patitis, or Inflammation of the Liver; an 
accurate investigation of which must there-
|P_viii
fore be an object of the first importance to 
every practitioner in that country. 

There are as yet only three publications on 
this disease in England, and they are defec-
tive, as they were given by their authors, in 
consequence of some cases which they met 
with at sea; inconsiderable either in number 
or variety when compared with those which 
happen in the field. 

The Author of the present Treatise 
landed in India with the care of a thousand 
of his Majesty's troops, and other regiments 
fell to his charge. He thus had an oppor-
tunity of seeing the Hepatitis in all it's varie-
ties of form, and of attending minutely to 
it's phoenomena. 

This led him to attempt an innovation 
in the practice, which he found successful 
for the last nine months of his continuance 
in that country. 

|P_ix
Since his Essay on the Hepatitis has been 
in the press, the report of four new-raised 
regiments being to be sent to India, has 
induced him to add an Essay on the Spas-
modic Affections, which presented them-
selves immediately on the arrival of the 
troops with whom he landed in that 
country. 

Spasms are very likely to be the first 
diseases of Europeans in India. And as 
the Author recollects no English Treatise 
on the Spasms in India drawn from personal 
observation, he has given the annexed 
concise account, rather than delay it's publi-
cation until he could find leisure to enlarge 
upon the subject. 

He has however omitted nothing either 
in the Hepatitis or Spasms which he can 
think of that has any immediate reference to 
the practical parts of these subjects; though 
he is far from entertaining the idea that he 
|P_x
has at length exhausted either of them by 
his own observations. 

He trusts that the endeavour to furnish 
the officer and inexperienced practitioner to 
these climates with the means of preventing 
and of curing two of the most formidable 
diseases of the East, will amply apologize 
for the numerous defects which a critical 
reader may, no doubt, discern in the follow-
ing pages. 

|P_
ON 
SPASMODIC AFFECTIONS 
IN 
INDIA. 

|P_7
[}AN ESSAY
ON THE 
HEPATITIS IN INDIA. }]
THOSE who are conversant in medi-
cal writings, or have attended much 
to dissections in hospitals, know in how 
many patients the liver, which had never 
been suspected of any disease, has been 
found, after death, in a morbid state. It 
is a fact, that, in a great number of such 
cases, the affected part has gone through 
all the different stages of the latent disease, 
|P_8
without ever exhibiting any of the symp-
toms by which we are taught, in the de-
scription of nosologists, to distinguish it. 

Without paying any regard to defini-
tions, I shall therefore proceed to a faithful 
relation of the Hepatitis, as it appeared in 
several hundreds of the men and officers, 
during and after a campaign of twenty-
two months, in the Carnatic and Tanjore 
countries of India. 

This disease is more common to the 
military than to any other set of people, 
and to those especially who serve on the 
Coromandel coast, as in this quarter the 
fatigues of the troops are the greatest. In 
Bengal, where all the expeditions are car-
ried on only by water, in vessels covered 
from the rays of the sun, and where the 
provisions are better and more regularly 
supplied, diseased livers are much less fre-
quent. From the history of this disease, 
it will appear not to be so acute as is gene-
rally imagined; but that it may, and very 
|P_9
often does, continue in a chronic state, for 
weeks, months, sometimes years, and 
becomes suddenly acute by intemperance 
in drinking, or the improper use of mer-
cury. The symptoms of vomiting, hic-
cup, or pain of the side or shoulder, too 
generally imagined to be necessary at-
tendants of this disease, will not be found 
to have accompanied one half of the cases 
of diseased liver, which have gone through 
all their different stages. 

Without taking any notice of the gene-
ral pathology of the disease, I shall divide 
the phenomena into three stages, viz. the 
chronic, acute, and suppurative; and de-
scribe them in the order in which they 
appeared. To prove the acute stage not 
to be also a suppurative one, I have no 
facts. But as one of these stages always 
yields to a-peculiar treatment, and the 
other seldom to any, the distinction may 
not be unnecessary. 

|P_10
[}THE FIRST, OR CHRONIC STAGE. }]
FOR some time before the pain of the 
shoulder and side becomes violent, the 
animal spirits are much diminished: the 
stools begin to be very irregular, some 
days scarce any, at others very profuse and 
acrid: the countenance is tumid and 
bloated. Sometimes the tunica albuginea 
of the eyes is yellow, but more commonly 
of a dull white appearance. The skin, 
especially of the muscular parts of the 
body, is dry and squalid. 

The urine is generally more or less high 
coloured, and small in quantity; the per-
spiration scanty and partial; the tongue 
dry with thirst. The stomach is extremely 
variable: frequently, before dinner, there 
is a momentary sickness, which is almost 
as instantly succeeded by a sensation of 
hunger. After eating, all these symptoms 
|P_11
are alleviated for an hour or two, and then 
succeeded, either by heartburn or pain-
ful gripes; the pulse is small, hard, and 
quick, especially towards the evening; 
the gums contract a hardness; the 
shoulders appear daily more elevated. In 
many there is a dull pain in the lumbar 
region. 

After these symptoms have continued for 
some time, an induration of a part of the 
liver may be sometimes felt, by laying 
the patient on his back, with the head 
low, and the knees a little elevated. The 
patient frequently continues in this state 
for a considerable time, until the dejection 
of spirits, which always more or less at-
tends this disease, prompts him to the im-
moderate use of wine, which scarcely ever 
fails to accelerate the approach of the acute 
or inflammatory stage. 

|P_12
[}THE SECOND, OR INFLAMMATORY STAGE. }]
THE countenance, which, from the 
beginning of the preceding stage, had 
contracted a morbid appearance, becomes 
now, at intervals, more florid than was 
common to the patient even in his best 
health. The stools are small, frequent, 
and resembling those in the dysentery. 
The pain of the shoulder and side, which 
before was obtuse and shifting, especially 
that of the former, becomes suddenly 
very acute. When this pain of the shoulder 
is felt, it always corresponds with that part 
of the liver which is most immediately 
diseased; being more or less anteriorly or 
posteriorly situated, according as the ante-
rior or posterior parts of the liver are the 
seat of the complaint: and with the left 
lobe the left shoulder is frequently af-
fected. In this stage the pain of the 
|P_13
shoulder is frequently increased on every 
motion of the diaphragm, attended with a 
troublesome short cough, and catching of 
the breath, in inspirations, as well as an 
increased pain on the region of the liver 
being touched. Sometimes the easiest po-
sition is on the diseased side, at other times 
on the opposite; but more commonly on 
the back, with the head rather low. The 
Hepatitis, in this stage, begins its attack 
as often with a flux and tenesmus as 
with a fixed pain of the shoulder; and in 
this case the person falls a sacrifice to a 
mistaken conception of the disease. Un-
der this fallacious appearance the sick is 
commonly relieved by salts, or some gen-
tle laxatives, until, the acute stage being 
palliated, the disease assumes the primitive 
chronic form; in which state he continues 
with irregular secretions, the urine high 
coloured, the countenance of a sallow 
complexion, and every day impressed with 
an air of additional melancholy. Many 
unfortunate persons, driven to despair, by 
the continuance of the complaint for one 
|P_14
or two years, have at length perished by 
violent means, which their ungovernable 
impatience had suggested. The period 
most usually fatal is the accession of the 
third stage, which is hastened by the use 
both of astringents and bitters. 

[}THE THIRD, OR SUPPURATIVE STAGE. }]
IN a few days or weeks after the dysen-
teric symptoms have abated, the patient 
becomes so tired of the looseness which 
remains, that he is desirous of having it 
flopped. For this purpose, the common 
practice is to order astringents or bitters, 
which indeed soon check the looseness; 
but, in a short time after, he is attacked 
with a deep hollow-sounding cough, from 
that side of the lungs which corresponds 
to the lobe of the liver most diseased. 

|P_15
Whenever the cough commences the 
greatest part of that side of the liver is 
generally occupied with an abscess, by 
which its substance is already consumed; 
though this purulent collection seldom gave 
any token of its existence, until it had 
opened to itself a passage through the dia-
phragm and lungs, or into the cavity of 
the abdomen. In this emergency the 
patient is either suffocated by the sudden 
inundation of the lungs, or miserably ex-
pires by the more slow effects of incurable 
inanition, which is promoted by an uncon-
cocted discharge of the aliments, accom-
panied with flatulence and gripes. 

Where no astringents have been given, 
there are sometimes discovered more su-
perficial suppurations, which are easily 
opened with the knife, and cured in a 
short time. 

But those which succeed the sudden 
stoppage of the looseness, when this inci-
dent is attended with a deep hollow-sound-
|P_16
ing cough, prove equally mortal, whether 
they point outwardly or penetrate the 
cavities. 

In these forms the Hepatitis most com-
monly made its appearance. But there is 
another shape, under which it remained for 
years, without running into the more acute 
stages, especially among the natives and 
those Europeans who had arrived in the 
country at a very early period. This form 
is that of an intermittent fever, irregular 
in its accessions, sometimes ushered in by a 
cold, though oftener only by a hot stage; 
but never without the pulse becoming 
smaller and quicker: the duration of the 
hot or sweating stage likewise bearing no 
proportion to the length or shortness of 
the cold one. It is called the Hill-fever, 
from its being endemic in the hilly parts 
of the Carnatic; and is often considered as 
incurable. 

In all the cases I have seen of this kind 
the livers were diseased, especially the left 
|P_17
lobes; and the patients were restored to 
health only by treating their complaints 
as diseased livers. 

Authors generally mention vomitings as 
concomitant symptoms when the concave 
parts, and hiccups, when the convex parts 
of the liver are diseased. But I have seen 
both parts imposthumated without either 
of these symptoms; and indeed have very 
seldom met with them in any hepatic 
complaints. A nausea and want of appe-
tite are much more common in the latter 
stages of this disease. 

The pain in this disease is usually ascribed 
to an adhesion of the convex part of the 
liver to the peritoneum; the consequence 
of which is, that the patients are induced 
to lie on the diseased side. But when the 
concave part is affected, to recline on the 
opposite side is an easier situation. 

Mr. Matthews has remarked that only 
persons in whom the thorax is narrow have 
|P_18
any pain in the epigastric, and those in 
whom it is broad, in the lumbar region. 

But, as far as I ever could observe, these 
pains alternated in each of the patients 
independently of any difference in the con-
formation of the chest. 

Whether the pain of the shoulder arises 
from the adhesion to the diaphragm, as 
some have supposed, or from the junction 
of the phrenic nerve, with the third and 
fourth of the cervical, I cannot pretend to 
say; but that it does not depend always 
upon the enlargement of the liver, I can 
with great confidence affirm; having seen 
many amazingly enlarged, by abscesses 
formed in them, where this symptom had 
never been observed by the patients. 

The free descent of the transverse sep-
tum, upon which respiration much depends, 
being impeded, a greater or less degree 
of dyspnœa must necessarily ensue. 

|P_19
Though no persons, after the age of 
puberty, are exempted from this disease, 
when exposed to the operation of the ex-
citing causes, I have observed that those 
of a sanguine temperament were more 
frequently afflicted than any other. 

I never yet saw the disease in any who 
was not an adult. Out of twenty drum-
mers of the 101st regiment, under the age 
of puberty, not one was seized with it, 
though they were constantly in the field, 
and performed their marches more regularly 
than any other part of the regiment. 

The particular circumstances to which 
our army was exposed were the following, 
which I have therefore ventured to assign 
as the remote causes of the disease: 

A hot climate, 
Injuries of the cranium from the rays 
of the sun, 
Abuse of spirits, 
Passions of the mind, 
|P_20
Violent exercise, 
Bad water, 
Want of vegetables, 
Great repletion after long fasting, 
Abuse of Mercury. 
[}HEAT. }]
HEAT being one of the most univer-
sal of all stimulants, has frequently pro-
duced the best effects, by increasing all the 
secretions: but though moderate heat, 
like moderate drinking, be frequently salu-
tary, extreme heat, like abuses of dram-
drinking, always leaves the system more 
languid, and consequently the secretions 
less copious. And, as the circulation 
through the liver is naturally languid, this 
organ is, of all the bowels, the first to feel 
these effects. 

|P_21
[}RAYS OF THE SUN. }]
THE rays of the sun on the scull 
prove still a greater stimulus to the brain, so 
as frequently to produce instantaneous death. 
Whenever persons escaped with moderate 
sun-strokes, they often had at first increased 
secretions of bile, which were succeeded 
by a proportionable deficiency. The same 
effect happens frequently in fractured sculls. 
At first there is a profusion of bile, then 
very little; and sometimes it is followed 
by abscesses; of which there are instances 
given by Pegreas, Ballonius, Slegius, Pou-
teau, Velschius, Paré, Greaume, Binos-
quius, Marmannus, De Merchettes, Char-
rieré, Job. Mac Rereanus, Bianchi, and 
other authors. 

|P_22
[}PASSIONS OF THE MIND. }]
THE melancholy which takes place in 
the Hepatitis, the diminution of bile in 
melancholy, the increased secretion of 
bile from anger, sun-strokes and injuries of 
the cranium, with their consequences, all 
serve to prove a remarkable sympathy be-
tween the liver and brain. I am therefore 
inclined to believe, that, next to the rays of 
the sun and excesses in spirituous liquors, 
all the depressing passions are to be consi-
dered as the most certain remote causes of 
this disease.[/1./]

|P_23
[}BAD WATER. }]
CLEGHORN observes that, on the 
east side of Minorca, where the waters 
are bad, tumefied spleens and livers are 
common both to men and brutes. 

The badness of the Carnatic waters may 
be sufficient argument for classing it as a 
cause, especially when we consider the great 
quantities of it which the men were obliged 
to drink from the extreme heat of the 
climate. 

|P_24
[}CHANGE OF DIET. }]
EVERY change of diet, from a long 
continued one, seems to act as a stimulus 
on the biliary ducts. 

The officers and men who were prisoners 
in chains with Tippo-Saib, in the East 
Indies, were allowed only rice, water, and 
capsicum, for the many months they were 
with him. 

When they were released, the animal 
food of every kind which they attempted 
to eat, purged them so violently that they 
could take it only in the smallest quantities 
for a considerable time. 

The British fleet not appearing with the 
store-ships, the army was reduced to the 
necessity of living almost entirely on animal 
food. The natives of the army, whose 
customary diet is chiefly rice, were all 
purged by this change. 

|P_25
The like happens both to men and 
officers, after living some months at sea on 
the same diet; on making a port, the ve-
getables always produce such copious secre-
tions of bile as oblige them to be moderate 
in their use. 

The patent dried cabbage was laid in for 
the use of the 101st regiment. They had 
none of it for the first month of the voyage; 
but as soon as they began to eat it they were 
all purged. 

From fish also the same effects have 
been seen. 

[}GREAT REPLETION AFTER LONG FASTING. }]
AS the troops were frequently exposed 
to long fasting, they were very apt to over-
charge their stomachs. To prove this to 
|P_26
be a highly debilitating cause, the following 
recent and well-known fact may be men-
tioned. At the famine at Madras, in 
October 1782, several native children were 
taken by the English to their tables; by 
their extreme voracity, their viscera soon 
became diseased, their bellies tumefied, and 
schirrous indurations were to be felt in 
all those who had not their diet limited 
for a considerable time. 

I shall afterwards have occasion to men-
tion the effects of mercury, in treating of 
the cure of this disease. 

I shall now hazard a few conjectures re-
lative to the proximate cause of this disease; 
though I would not be understood as being 
dogmatical on a point of so much uncer-
tainty. 

In consequence of a relaxation of the 
system, especially of the ultimate branches 
of the vena portarum, the secretion of bile 
is not only diminished, but that which is 
|P_27
secreted is more watery than usual, and less 
endowed with the natural qualities of the 
bile. On this account chylification be-
comes imperfect, and all the different in-
testinal phaenomena are produced. Au-
thors have related the dissection of pa-
tients affected with dysenteries, whose 
livers were found diseased; and these ap-
pearances are conformable to the doctrine 
now mentioned. In many cases of chronic 
dysenteries I found the livers in one of the 
stages above described. The spasm of the 
colon, in those complaints, therefore, can 
only be considered as the effects of the state 
of the bile, and not the proximate cause of 
this disease. Though salts frequently re-
lieve the tormina and spasms, they never 
are sufficient to remove the disease, except 
where they induce a new and continued 
energy in the biliary ducts, so that stools 
copiously and regularly charged with a 
deep yellow bile are produced. As a fur-
ther confirmation of this opinion, I may 
add, that the most obstinate of these dysen-
teries readily yielded to the same treatment 
|P_28
as the Hepatitis after every other method 
had failed. 

From the gradual diminution of bile in 
the Hepatitis, as well as the gradual dimi-
nutions of energy in the system, there is 
every reason to suspect: the extremities of 
the vena portarum to be the seat of this 
disease. 

From the few nerves sent to the liver, 
there is but little reason to expect much 
energy through the medium of those or-
gans; and on account of the distance of 
the vena portarum from the heart, there is 
still less reason to expect much influence 
from a vis a tergo. Why, then, along 
continued weakness of the system should 
always produce diseased livers in India, ap-
pears to me not to be so difficult a question, 
as why the same cause should not render 
this a more frequent disease in other cli-
mates. 

With respect to the diagnostic symptoms, 
|P_29
the pain of the shoulder and side, when it 
exists, is a very certain characteristic of the 
disease; but it cannot be considered as a 
pathognomonic symptom, as it is by no 
means constant. 

The elevation of the shoulders, as the 
disease advanced, was evident; but this 
possibly may take place in other morbid 
affections. 

The hardness of the gums was a very 
constant attendant; but this, likewise, is 
common to many persons, both in a state 
of health and disease; and therefore, of 
itself, can form no certain diagnostic. 

The pushing the fingers against the hy-
pochondres would sometimes give a sense 
of pain or itching to one of the shoulders. 
But, upon the whole, I am of opinion that 
the presence of this disease can only be 
ascertained by attending to the whole suc-
cession of phaenomena; as it so often exists 
without the pain of the side and shoulder, 
|P_30
and as the hardness of the gums and ele-
vation of the shoulders, appear not of 
themselves to be evident and sufficient 
diagnostics. 

In the first stage, if the cure be properly 
attended to, we may with certainty pro-
nounce a favourable termination of the 
disease. We may be equally confident in 
the prognosis of the second stage, when 
the tongue becomes furred, and the gums 
less hard from the treatment about to be 
recommended. In the third stage, the 
tongue frequently remains clean, and the 
gums cannot be affected. The prognosis 
in the last stage can never be favourable, 
unless we can be sure that the suppuration 
is small and superficial. 

The indication of cure in this disease is 
to restore the energy of the system, and of 
the vena portarum. This may be done 
frequently in the first, and sometimes second 
stages of the disease, by change of climate, 
and avoiding the other remote causes. But 
|P_31
all the common methods used in northern 
climates proved in these cases ineffectual. 
From small doses of neutral salts, such as 
the sal glauberi given at intervals, so as to 
keep up a constant action, the disease was 
sometimes brought back from the second 
stage to the first. 

The vitriolic acid was tried frequently 
without any kind of advantage: it occa-
sioned an unnatural appetite, and commonly 
hastened the progress of the disease. 

The bark, and bitters of every kind, 
were attended with similar effects. 

As these remedies have been long found to 
be ineffectual, practitioners of late years 
have had recourse to mercury, introducing 
it to the system both by the mouth and 
skin; and by this treatment they have be-
come much more successful. 

Soon after my arrival in India, I saw 
several cases treated in this manner with 
|P_32
evident advantage. A hard gum had always 
been observed to be a constant attendant 
on this disease. I had not seen many cases 
before I began to observe that the patient 
seldom or never was relieved until the gums 
were made sore or spungy; and when they 
could not be thus affected, a suppuration 
almost always took place. I entertained 
hope that this state of the gums would fur-
nish me with a certain criterion, to judge 
when a sufficient quantity of mercury was 
thrown into the system. 

In this state of uncertainty, I was sur-
prised to observe that a small quantity of 
mercury, taken by the mouth, affected the 
gums very much, and often without pro-
ducing any other sensible alteration. On 
the contrary, when a large quantity was 
applied to the skin, the time required to 
affect the gums was much longer, and the 
alterations on the system were much greater. 

This observation first sugested to me the 
supposition, that, when the mercury was 
|P_33
introduced by the stomach, it might have 
a tendency to pass off by the mouth before 
the system was much affected; whereas, 
when it was introduced by the skin, a large 
quantity could be retained in the system 
before the gums became affected: and 
therefore, if any advantage was to be ex-
pected from mercury in this disease, this 
latter method, in which larger quantities 
could be introduced into the system, ought 
naturally to be preferred. 

The two following cases, related to me 
by the gentlemen themselves, first led me 
to believe the necessity of much mercury 
in the cure of this disease. 

[}CASE of Major D. C. taken in 
September 1783.}]
Major D. C. of the Company's ser-
vice, a stout, strong-made Highlander, of 
about sixty years of age, after being two 
years in India, began to labour under a 
|P_34
liver-complaint, which was relieved by 
mercury. As the mercury was only given 
him by the mouth, the gums were fre-
quently affected. The relief he always 
experienced from its use, made him con-
tinue it as freely as possible for near 
twelve months, when the pain of the side 
and shoulder ceased. Eighteen years had 
elapsed from this time without his ever 
suffering a day's sickness. His gums ever 
since continuing oozy, and his saliva pre-
ternaturally flowing, are the only incon-
veniencies he is sensible of from this long 
course. 

[}CASE II.
Taken in Sept. 1783, from Capt. L. of 
the Company's Service. }]
Captain L. a slender young man, of 
about twenty-eight years of age, told me 
that, for the two first years after his ar-
rival in India, he laboured under a dy-
sentery, which made his life be despaired 
of, until he fell under the care of a sur-
geon who gave him mercury. This me-
|P_35
dicine relieved him so much that he con-
tinued to take it in considerable quantities, 
but all by the mouth, and persisted in its 
use as freely as the gums would permit, 
until the disease was removed. During 
ten years, which was the whole time in-
tervening from this course, he had enjoyed 
good health; but his teeth and gums 
never after recovered their natural appear-
ance; and his saliva still continued to be 
too profuse. 

Besides pointing out the necessity of 
much mercury, the last case had deter-
mined me to examine the livers of all 
dysenteric patients in future. An oppor-
tunity of confirming the good effects 
of such an examination soon after presented 
itself in the following case: 

[}CASE III. }]
An officer in his majesty's service, after 
a campaign of sixteen months, during 
which he had suffered repeated sickness, 
|P_36
was attacked with dysenteric symptoms. 
Having used salts, fomentations, glysters, 
opium, &c. for eight days, without any 
effect, his case was thought to be mortal. 

I then saw him; and, on examination, 
found the right lobe of his liver evidently 
diseased. He was immediately put upon a 
course of mercurial frictions, which, in 
an hour's time, afforded him more relief 
than he had experienced from the first 
attack. The frictions were successfully 
continued; but the exhibition of a few 
grains of calomel, after the ninth friction, 
affected the mouth so suddenly, and so 
violently, as to render the continuance of 
them impracticable. The dysenteric symp-
toms disappeared, but his mouth remained 
for several days very troublesome. He 
was sent to the Danish settlement on the 
coast for the reestablishment of his health. 
His mouth was scarce well, when he was 
as severely attacked with the flux, and a 
pain of the left lobe of the liver. 

|P_37
On the idea that this pain was a spasm 
of the colon, fomentations, glysters, opium, 
and evacuations, were again put in prac-
tice. But the patient, finding all to no 
purpose, determined on having recourse 
to friction, though contrary to the advice 
of all his medical attendants. 

This expedient again afforded him 
speedy relief; and he was restored to 
health by using it as freely as his mouth 
would permit. He ever after enjoyed 
good health in India, and is now in Ire-
land, a living witness to his case. 

The necessity which the patient found 
of having recourse to these frictions, with 
the great benefit he experienced from 
them, and the sudden soreness of the 
gums induced by the calomel; all these 
circumstances furnished me with the first 
suspicion of the bad consequences of giving 
the mercury by the mouth. 

The success of this gentleman's se-
cond recourse to the frictions came to 
|P_38
my knowledge just time enough to en-
courage me to return and adhere to them 
in the following case: 

[}CASE IV. }]
An officer in his majesty's service, after 
the siege of Cuddalore, laboured under a 
chronic complaint of the liver, and con-
tinued in the field until he was attacked 
with dysentery. Fourteen drachms of 
mercurial ointment, applied in the quan-
tity of two drachms a day, removed the 
dysentery, without affecting the gums. In 
about two months the dysentery recurred, 
and was again relieved by frictions, con-
tinued during another week. At the dis-
tance of six or eight days from this period 
he was suddenly attacked with what he 
thought to be only a painful crick of the 
left side of the neck. For this complaint 
recourse was had to topical applications of 
opium and volatile liniment, hot flannels, 
and fotuses, but without any effect; and, 
about two hours after, a pain, not less 
|P_39
violent, was felt about the left hypo-
chondre, and extended over the stomach. 
As the patient had used such a quantity 
of mercury, recourse was had to venesec-
tion; which rendered the pulse more fre-
quent, and the pain more insuportable. 
The dysenteric symptoms having recurred, 
a small dose of salts was now tried, with-
out any benefit. Mercury was again re-
solved on, and rubbed in, as before, for 
nine days; but neither afforded any relief, 
nor so much as affected the gums. In 
compliance with the patient's anxiety, 
mercury was exhibited by the mouth. A 
few doses of calomel produced ulcerations 
of the gums, but no sponginess, or re-
mission of symptoms. The mercury was 
discontinued on account of these ulcer-
ations about the gums. The pain be-
coming more violent, and the quantity of 
mercury already used being very great, the 
patient began to lose all faith in that me-
dicine. Mustard-plasters to the pained 
part were then tried; but the irritation 
which they excited could not be long 
|P_40
endured, and they afforded no relief. 
Frictions with hot camphorated oil were 
also tried to no purpose. 

Being now informed of the success at-
tending the third case, I determined, 
notwithstanding the exhausted state of the 
patient, to push the mercury by the skin 
only, until the gums should become af-
fected. Half an ounce of the strongest 
mercurial ointment was rubbed in about 
the back, abdomen, and thighs. Before 
this friction was completely finished, the 
patient became so much relieved, as to be 
able to lie at his full length, in any situ-
ation but on the diseased side. A drachm 
of the ointment was continued to be 
rubbed in, night and morning, with evi-
dent good effect; and, after the friction 
had been repeated twelve times, the gums 
became uniformly spongy. From that 
time the pain ceased, the pulse became 
softer and slower, and the patient speedily 
returned to a better state of health than 
he had ever before enjoyed in India. He 
|P_41
remained more than a year after in the dif-
ferent parts of that country, without suf-
fering any kind of relapse. His gums 
remained not very long spongy, nor did his 
saliva continue to flow so profusely as in 
those cases where the mercury had been 
taken by the mouth. He is now in Eu-
rope, and suffers no inconvenience from 
change of climate 

This, and the preceding case, impressed 
me with an opinion that there was an ab-
solute necessity to avoid exhibiting mer-
cury by the mouth when the patient was 
put under a course of frictions. 

In order to try whether this opinion 
was well-founded, I procured a large 
quantity of good mercurial ointment, and 
proceeded to the cure of a variety of cases 
with the frictions, unassisted by any other 
remedy. I now observed, that, by this 
method, the gums were much slower in 
being affected; but, when they were af-
|P_42
fected, the disease appeared to be entirely 
removed. 

Sometimes the patient was relieved two 
or three days before the gums were af-
fected. But, more frequently, relief was 
not to be expected till a few hours before 
the gums became spongy; from which 
time the secretions, the appetite, the pulse, 
the spirits, and the complexion, very 
speedily became natural. I also observed, 
that, where the mercury was given by the 
stomach, the gums, after becoming sore, 
remained hard and of a natural colour in 
many places. In other parts there were 
troublesome ulcerations, attended with a 
copious spitting. Whereas, from mercu-
rial frictions alone, ulcerations never came 
on suddenly, but were always preceded by 
such a regular swelling and change of co-
lour in the gums, as to render their pre-
vention extremely easy. I continued in 
India nine months after I had adopted 
this practice. All the confirmed liver 
cases (amounting to an immense number) 
|P_43
which from that time came under my 
care, were, by this method, cured without 
suppurations; nor was there any relapse, 
so far as I could learn, during my subse-
quent residence in the country. 

I shall add the following case to those I 
have already given. 

[}CASE V. }]
Lieutenant C. of the Company's service, 
about twenty-five years of age, had fre-
quently, after his arrival, which was five 
years before, in India, laboured under re-
peated attacks of the Hepatitis. Mercurial 
frictions and pills had constantly relieved 
him, until a few weeks before I saw him: 
he had then gone through his usual course 
with but little relief, and his mouth had 
become too sore to persist in any farther 
trial of it. As no medical person was 
near him, he had recourse to repeated 
doses of salts. His mouth was relieved 
|P_44
by the salts, but his disease continued. 
He came under my care about a week 
after, and was immediately put upon the 
frictions, with one drachm of mercurial, 
ointment night and morning. Near three 
ounces of ointment were used in this man-
ner before the gums were affected; they 
then began to swell and assume a deep red 
colour. From this time he enjoyed a total 
cessation of pain, and recovered a better 
state of health than he had ever before ex-
perienced in that country. 

After these cases had happened our re-
giment was carried round to Bengal in 
the Vansittart English Indiaman. This 
ship had just returned from Batavia; and 
many of her crew were then labouring 
under chronic dysenteries contracted in 
that settlement. I was asked, by the sur-
geon of the ship, to see one of the worst 
cases. 

From what I had then learned of the 
diseases of the country, I pronounced the 
|P_45
case to be a Hepatitis. The surgeon 
could hardly be persuaded of this, as the 
man had never complained of pain of the 
shoulder or side, nor been seized either 
with vomitings or hiccups. But in two 
days a large tumor in the region of the 
right lobe of the liver confirmed my as-
sertion. 

The tumor was opened, and about 
three English pints of matter instantly 
discharged from the liver. The man died 
a few days after the operation. The rest 
of the sick crew were recovered by treat-
ing their cases as diseased livers. 

After relating so many instances of the 
good effefts of mercury, it may be expected 
that I should offer some opinion with re-
spect to its mode of operation. On this 
subject I shall be extremely brief. 

As there are no stimuli, that I know 
of, which can support, for so great a 
length of time, an increased action of the 
|P_46
vascular system, I presume this must be 
the reason why mercury has the advantage 
over all other medicines of that class, and 
may truly be said to possess very peculiar 
powers. 

But mercury, given by the stomach, 
never can be made to keep up that con-
tinued action, so necessary for the cure of 
this, and perhaps of every other disease, 
which has been slow in its progress. 

Notwithstanding all I have said of this 
most excellent, though in the end debili-
tating medicine, I am of opinion that it 
should never be used too soon; and that, 
when adopted, it ought to be persisted in 
regularly. The use of small doses of ca-
lomel, as a prophilactic, I am convinced 
has often been the means of producing 
this disease. I would, therefore, advise no 
person to have recourse to mercury as a 
preventive, nor ever to begin with it in 
the first stage of the disease; as, during 
that period, a change of situation and diet 
|P_47
may prove sufficient to effect the cure. 
But, in the second stage, the frictions ap-
pear to be not only the most expeditious, as 
well as the most successful, method of 
treatment. 

It may be proper to observe that, dur-
ing the mercurial course, acids should be 
avoided; and animal food generally proves 
the best kind of diet. Not less than a 
drachm of the strongest ointment should 
be thoroughly rubbed in, either upon the 
side, or some other extensive surface, every 
night and morning. 

The mercurial frictions, having relieved 
or entirely removed the pain, ought not to 
be discontinued until the gums become 
affected; otherwise the patient is ex-
posed to a relapse, with a greater tendency 
to suppuration. 

Sometimes, towards the conclusion of 
the mercurial course, viz. about the time 
the gums become affected, a kind of eri-
sipilatous eruption breaks out all over the 
|P_48
body: but, by a discontinuance of the 
mercury, this may be soon removed. In 
other cases it was observed that the stools 
first becoming copious after the course, 
were sometimes mixed with a great quan-
tity of gelatinous matter, which had some-
thing the appearance of hydatids. As this 
symptom seldom appeared till health was 
returning, no variation of treatment be-
came necessary. 

Slight pains of the muscles of the arms, 
thighs, shoulders, and side, remain for 
some time after the use of mercury; but 
none of them are attended with any catch-
ing in respiration, as in the Hepatitis, and 
deserve no particular attention. For some 
time after the mercurial course, however, 
the great increase of perspiration, especially 
about the abdomen, renders it absolutely 
necessary to keep that part well covered; 
otherwise the hot winds, which blow with 
so much force in that country, are apt to 
produce violent spasmodic pains of the 
bowels. 

|P_49
The appetite becomes exceedingly keen 
after the mercurial course, and renders the 
greatest precautions necessary that the sto-
mach be not overcharged. The dinner 
should be made of one good dish of roast 
meat, or cury, without grease, with but a 
very moderate use of vegetables or fruit. 
Two or three glasses of wine after dinner 
are as much as ought to be indulged in 
for some time. Drinking of grog, or any 
spirituous liquors, should not be used; 
and all warm weak drinks ought likewise 
to be avoided. As the few glasses of wine 
after dinner are prescribed with the view 
of promoting digestion, no other liquid 
ought to be taken for at least an hour after, 
that the power of the wine may not be 
weakened. 

The mercurial course, not unfrequently, 
produces so great a secretion of bile as to 
render the use of vegetables and acids 
almost, if not totally, impracticable. This 
effect sometimes arises to what is called in 
India a mercurial flux; and may be then 
|P_50
removed, by abstaining from all acids and 
vegetables and adhering a few days entirely 
to a diet of animal food, with the use of 
spirits and water, or Madeira wine. A 
similar flux happens on first arriving in 
warm climates, which yields to the same 
method of cure, being only a preternatural 
increased secretion of bile, occasioned by 
the abuse of acids, fruits, or vegetables. 
After the Hepatitis is removed, the con-
stant, but cautious, use of acids, in hot 
climates, proves the best means of prevent-
ing a relapse. 

|P_51
[}ON 
SPASMODIC AFFECTIONS
IN 
INDIA. }]
SPASMS were the first diseases which 
appeared amongst the troops who arrived 
at Madras in October 1782, under the 
command of Major General Sir John Bur-
goyne. More than fifty of these fresh 
men were killed by them within the first 
three days after they were landed in that 
country, and in less than a month from 
that time, upwards of a thousand had suf-
fered from attacks of these complaints. 

The testanus or spasm is distinguished 
by medical writers into various species, 
|P_52
according either to the particular parts 
affected with contraction, or the duration 
of the disease. But as all these different 
appearances (at least when not arising 
from wounds) seem to proceed from the 
same causes, to yield to the same method 
of cure, and to afford nothing particular 
with respest to the prognosis of the disease, 
I shall, without specifying their distinc-
tions, describe the various phænomena, as 
generally observed in India. 

I must, however, previously acknow-
ledge, that though I have seen many 
wounds in India, I never saw a wounded 
person affected with spasms, except in the 
agonies of death; and therefore I can by 
no means affirm that the following obser-
vations are equally applicable to those te-
tanic affections, which are described by 
authors as arising from wounds; because 
such cases, from their peculiar exciting 
causes, must be still more untraceable and 
hazardous. 

|P_53
The symptoms which commonly first 
presented themselves were coldness of 
the surface of the body, especially of the 
hands; feebleness of the pulse, and spas-
modic contractions of the lower extre-
meties, soon extending to the muscles 
of the abdomen, diaphragm, and ribs. 
As the spasms advanced, the muscles might 
be seen to assume the rigidity of cartilages; 
sometimes causing the body to remain im-
moveably extended; sometimes bending 
the trunk through its whole length, an-
teriorly; and sometimes, though seldomer, 
backwards. The parts in which the 
spasms began generally remained rigid; 
but those which were subsequently seized 
with them, had momentary intermissions 
of the contractions; the only intervals 
of relief experienced by the patient from 
the most tormenting pains. The hands 
and feet then generally became sodden, 
with cold sweats; the nails livid, the pulse 
more feeble and frequent, and the breath 
|P_54
so condensed as to be both seen and felt, 
issuing in a cold stream at a considerable 
distance. The thirst was insatiable; the 
tongue whitish, but never dry; vomitings 
became almost incessant; the spasms, cold 
sweats, and thirst, increased with the vo-
mitings; which last, if not checked, soon 
terminated the existence of the patient. 

In this manner, most commonly, was 
the succession of phaenomena; but often 
they were so rapid in their attack, that 
they seemed to seize the patient all in 
conjunction instantaneously. 

In some few, the extremities remained 
warm; in others also the spasms were 
only clonic or convulsive. Some died 
in the first hour of the attack; others 
lived a day or two with remissions; when 
they died either of universal spasms, or an 
apoplexy. On the dissection of the bodies 
after death, it appeared that no injury 
|P_55
had been sustained by the brain, liver, 
gall, bladder, stomach, or heart. 

All who recovered of this disease were 
observed to have very languid secretions 
for a considerable time after, and frequently 
carbuncles, which would sometimes yield 
neither to bark, opium, nor wine. 

At a general meeting of the faculty at 
Madras, this disease was unanimously 
judged to proceed from the four follow-
ing causes, viz. 

Damps from the earth, 
The not using of capsicum, 
Bad arrack, 
A coffee made of stramonium. 
The facts adduced in support of the 
first of these were, that fowls put into 
coops at night, in that season of the year, 
and on the same soil that the men slept, 
were always found dead the next morning, 
if the coop was not placed at a certain 
|P_56
height above the surface of the earth. 
And as a sufficient number of cotts had 
nor been previously procured for all the 
troops, many of them were obliged to 
sleep on the ground. 

[}CAPSICUM. }]
As the men had not then learned to eat 
capsicum with their meat, according to 
the general practice of Asia, this circum-
stance was considered as a predisponent 
cause of the disease. 

A bad kind of arrack, made from some 
of the most intoxicating vegetables, is often 
privately sold amongst the soldiery, and 
was therefore considered as one probable 
cause of the disease. 

In respect of the coffee made of stramo-
nium, which the natives both sell and 
drink themselves, as the cheapest of all 
modes of intoxication, it must be observed 
|P_57
that there were no proofs of any of the 
men having drank of this coffee. 

Towards ascertaining the most general 
exciting cause of this disease, I shall men-
tion the following facts. 

Drunkenness was very severely punished 
in all the newly arrived regiments; and 
to prevent detection the men, after the 
rolls were called in the evening, used to 
drink seven or eight large drams, and go 
to bed; immediately on awakening, their 
thirst was usually so great, that they drank 
three or four pints of cold water, which 
seldom failed to produce the disease. The 
first circumstance which led me to suspect 
this, and which was afterwards confirmed 
by the confessions of several of the men 
who recovered, was my observing that 
all the patients in the worst cases were 
brought into the hospital about four o'clock 
in the morning. They were attacked 
with the vomitings, and other symptoms, 
|P_58
almost immediately after they had drank 
the cold water. 

A mussulman, in the southern parts 
of the Tanjore country, having used the 
cold bath immediately after coition, was 
siezed with an universal spasm, and died 
in less than half an hour. 

An officer, after being twelve months 
in India, became my patient, for a large 
venereal ulcer, which laid bare a consider-
able portion of the urethra. After the 
ulcer was perfectly healed, and his mercu-
rial course finished, he exposed himself 
in his sleep to a stream of air. On waking 
the next morning he found his jaw stiff, 
but as the day became hot the stiffness 
went off. On mentioning it to me, he 
was desired to sleep warmer for the future, 
on the presumption that it was occasioned 
by an increase of perspiration, and irrita-
bility from the use of mercury. He felt 
no returns of his complaint until near a 
|P_59
fortnight after, when he was induced by 
the closeness and heat, during the first part 
of the night, again to set open the doors 
and windows. The winds blowing very 
strong towards the morning awaked him, 
when he found himself affected with the 
most dreadful spasms in every part of 
his body, attended with cold sweats, blind-
ness, and stiffness of his extremeties; all 
which symptoms could not be removed 
for the space of sixteen hours. 

This, and the case of an officer of the 
Company's service, who, immediately after 
the fatigue of a very hot day's march, 
plunged himself into a tank of cold water, 
are the only two cases of spasms I ever 
saw amongst officers[/2./]; though above three 
|P_60
hundred of the 101st private soldiers were 
attacked with them on the first month of 
their arrival at Madras[/3./]. 

From all these circumstances I am in-
duced to agree with those authors who 
have considered cold[/4./] as the most gene-
ral exciting cause of this disease. 

|P_61
The prognosis of this disease is formed 
with greater certainty from the warmth 
or coldness of the extremeties, than from 
either the universality of the spasms, or 
the frequency or steadiness of the pulse. 
Thus if the spasms were ever so general, 
with warmth of the extremeties, there was 
no immediate danger: on the contrary, if 
the spasm was ever so trifling, with cold-
ness, there was every danger to be feared. 

The warm bath, and wrapping up in 
blankets, with the use of opium, were 
what I at first chiefly depended upon in the 
cure of this disease. But what the faculty 
|P_62
there relied on most, was the liberal use 
of hot Madeira wine. 

If one bottle should be thrown up, as 
fast as it was drank, they recommended 
a second and third bottle. But this 
practice is not very successful: for; in 
the worst cases, the reachings are the most 
distressing symptoms; as the cold sweats 
and spasms are constantly observed to in-
crease with them. And though the thirst 
be always insatiable, yet to allow no 
more than half an ounce of some warm 
liquid at a time, and that of the most 
cordial kind, with thirty or forty drops 
of laudanum, proved a more successful 
plan than indulging the patient in a full 
draught. This cordial and laudanum I 
used to repeat as fast as it was thrown up. 
But when the patient retained a dose, I 
repeated the cordial, without the opium, 
but in the same small quantities, and at 
intervals. For a draught of any liquid 
was sure to make the vomitings recur, and 
with them the cold sweats, thirst, and 
spasms. 

|P_63
Afterwards, being in a situation where 
the warm bath could not be had recourse 
to, and being then satisfied by my own 
observations, by the testimony of many 
of the faculty at Madras, and by the 
con#t#nt practice of the natives, that 
warmth was the most successful method 
of combating this disease, I relied upon 
repeated injections of warm broth, with 
about thirty drops of laudanum, at the 
same time advising the se of general fric-
tions, with hot dry flannels, and the warm 
cordial draughts, with laudanum repeat-
edly, until the reachings had ceased: 
and by these means I thought I succeeded 
better than ever I had done with the 
warm bath. 

For those cases which were relieved by 
the warm bath oftener relapsed, than those 
relieved by the injections. 

The practice of the natives in this di-
sease is to use frictions, and hot dry sand, 
|P_64
or heat of any sort; giving likewise drams, 
or hot pepper water, to those whose casts 
will not admit of the drinking of spirits. 

A Dutch physician in that country is 
said to have been always very successful in 
this disease, by treating it in the following 
manner: to strip the patient, lay him on 
a cane couch, under which were placed 
stoves of fire; to cover the trunk and 
limbs from the air with a blanket, so dis-
posed that the heat from the stoves should 
be confined about the body; to have fric-
tions at the same time used under the 
blankets, with warm flannel[/5./], and to 
exhibit a dose of opium in solution after 
every vomiting. 

As I never had any cases of spasms after 
learning this method, I never had an op-
portunity of giving it a trial. 

|P_65
With regard to the accounts related by 
some authors of the successful use of mer-
curial frictions, rubifacients, or of blisters, 
in the cure of this disease, I have only to 
observe, that however universal the spasms 
were in all the cases I have seen, I never 
saw that case prove mortal where there 
was sufficient warmth upon the surface 
for the skin to absorb mercury, or to be 
made red by blisters or other stimulating 
applications. 

THE END. 
