
|P_
[}INTRODUCTION. }]
RUPTURES of the uterus have 
been considered as accidents, mor-
tal, for the most part, in their nature. 
When part of the child remains in ute-
ro, authors give some general directions 
for delivery; but agree in its fatal ten-
dency, if the child has escaped wholly 
into the cavity of the abdomen; con-
sidering any attempts to deliver, except 
by the caesarean operation, as fruitless. 
This was the opinion of Dr. Hunter: 
his high and deserved reputation has 
stampt such authority upon it, that prac-
titioners in general give up their patient 
for lost, without attempting any thing 
|P_4
for her relief. The cæsarian operation, 
in this country, has been attended with 
such ill success, that very few men are 
bold enough to recommend it, suppo-
sing that it would only be an addition 
to the patient's sufferings, without af-
fording any prospect of relief. 

Dr. Douglas, physician to the Asylum,
 some months since, published a case, 
where he succeeded in the delivery of a 
child from the cavity of the abdomen, 
and the woman recovered; from whence 
he infers, that those accidents, which 
admit the child to escape through a r
upture of the uterus, are not neces-
sarily fatal, and that the delivery is to 
be effected, without having recourse 
to the caesarean operation, with more 
ease than has been imagined. 

The case, which is now submitted to 
the consideration of the public, was a 
laceration of the vagina, happening 
early in parturition: the circumstances 
|P_5
of which having been clearly marked 
during the life of the patient, and con-
firmed by dissection after her death, 
throws a new light upon this part of 
midwifery, and renders it probable that 
many cases deemed irremediable, from 
being considered as ruptures of the ute-
rus, were only lacerations of the vagi-
na, and admitted of effectual assistance 
from art. 

This case, having given rise to many 
doubts upon the subject of ruptured 
uterus, induced me to enquire how far 
authors in general have been accurate 
in their observations. Upon examining 
such cases as were in my possession, I 
found, that many which are related as 
ruptures of the uterus, were in fact, la-
cerations of the vagina. Instances of 
which I shall give in cases from Vander 
Wiel, Bonetus, Dr. Douglas, Pouteau, 
and others. 

From a case communicated to me by 
a friend, I am further enabled to give 
|P_6
some account of the circumstances at-
tending a laceration of the vagina, when, 
the head being so low as to be wedged 
in the pelvis, the child did not escape 
into the cavity of the abdomen. On 
examining the circumstances of some 
cases described as proceeding from rup-
tures of the uterus, this appears some-
times to have happened without being 
discovered. 

The observations annexed, respecting 
the circumstances in which lacerations 
of the vagina differ from ruptures of 
the uterus; in the escape of the child 
or placenta into the abdomen, and the 
obstructions to delivery; and the other 
practical inferences drawn, are such as, 
I hope, will merit the attention of prac-
titioners. 

As Dr. Douglas's observations on an 
extraordinary case of ruptured uterus, 
is the latest publication on the subject, 
I shall have occasion to advert to it 
|P_7
oftener than to any other. If it has 
been any means of dispelling the idea 
of the impossibility of recovery in acci-
dents of this nature, which has so long 
been the general received opinion, sup-
ported by the highest authorities; I flat-
ter myself, that the following pages will 
be a further inducement to dispel our 
fears; as they tend to prove the great 
probability there is, that the escape of 
the child into the cavity of the abdo-
men happens oftener from lacerations 
of the vagina, than from ruptures of 
the uterus. 

Wm. GOLDSON. 
Portsmouth Common,
March 21, 1787. 

|P_
[}AN 
EXTRAORDINARY CASE 
OF 
LACERATED VAGINA. }]
ON August the 20th, 1786, I was 
desired by Mr. William Waller, 
of Gosport, to visit Mrs. Wilkins, with 
my partner Mr. Aylward. She was a 
patient of Mr. Waller's, and had been 
above twenty four hours in labour; 
after the membranes had broke, and 
the os internum been considerably di-
lated, the labour pains suddenly went 
off; the child's head could be no longer 
felt, and very dangerous symptoms had 
come on. We met there, in consulta-
tion, his father and Dr. Waller. 

|P_10
Mrs. Wilkins was a large woman, 
much used to laborious exercise, of a 
dark complexion, about thirty-six years 
of age, inclining to be lusty; her consti-
tution was naturally strong, and general-
ly healthy; she was then in labour with 
her fourth child; her former labours 
had been always lingering, but was, at 
each time, delivered of a living child, 
without more than ordinary assistance. 
During the present pregnancy, she was 
not able to move with so much ease as 
with her former children, complaining 
of much pain in the left hypogastrium. 

We were informed by Mr. Waller, that 
he was called to her assistance about a 
fortnight before; but finding that the 
pains were spurious, he ordered her an 
opiate, which gave her relief, and she 
continued easy until the preceding day; 
when being again sent to, about six 
o'clock in the morning, he then found 
her in labour; after waiting some time, 
the pains beginning to encrease, he made 
|P_11
an examination, and found that the os 
internum was dilated to the size of a 
crown piece. The membranes broke, 
and the waters were evacuated. Upon a 
further examination in the usual man-
ner, the head was found to present; but 
being only able to reach it with the 
point of his finger, he could not exactly 
ascertain its situation, in respect to ver-
tex or fontinel. Considering it a linger-
ing labour, he waited for the efforts of 
nature. The child's head advanced by 
slow degrees; and, after some hours, 
the prospect of a more speedy delivery 
seemed to be apparent, by the further 
dilatation of the os internum, although 
the head did not appear to be much 
engaged in the pelvis. She was, about 
this time, seized with a cramp in her 
left foot and leg, which afterwards ex-
tended to her belly, on the return of 
every pain. While he was directing a 
camphorated anodyne liniment, ano-
ther severe pain came on, which caused 
her to cry out most vehemently, oh the 
|P_12
cramp, the cramp! and which, she af-
terwards said, she believed was in her 
womb: this was soon after followed by 
a discharge of blood from the vagina, 
which continued for some time. 

Mr. Waller then observed that the la-
bour pains abated in their strength, and 
that they were succeeded by such as are 
common in colic, with peculiar twist-
ing in her bowels. He directed an emol-
lient glyster, which was repeated with 
an anodyne; but not finding so much 
relief from these as he expected, her 
pulse being full and quick, he took 
away about eight ounces of blood from 
her arm, and left her about two o'clock, 
giving directions, that she might be kept 
as cool as possible, the weather being 
very warm. 

He saw her again, between four and 
five o'clock, and found that the true 
labour pains had not returned; but 
that, in addition to the other symp-
|P_13
toms, she then complained of consider-
able thirst; had vomited frequently; 
was very restless; in great pain when 
moved, and felt a great degree of pain 
when he put his hand upon her belly. 
Upon examining the state of the labour, 
he could feel no presentation, the child's 
head having receded. In this situation, 
he thought it proper to repeat the glys-
ter, and ordered her, in the evening, 
another anodyne, together with a saline 
julep. With hopes that real and effi-
cient pains would return by the morn-
ing, he left her. 

On visiting her in the morning, very 
early, her attendants informed him, that 
she had been very thirsty and restless all 
night; her vomiting had been more se-
vere, and that she was in great pain 
when turned, complaining of a heavy 
lump which sell from side to side; it 
did not appear from an inspection of 
the cloths, that there had been any fur-
ther hemorrhage; upon inquiring more par-
|P_14
ticularly, it could not be found that she 
had made any urine, except as it came 
away involuntarily. 

On considering that there had been 
no return of real pains, and that the 
other symptoms were more urgent, he 
began to think that her case was of a 
more serious nature than he had at first 
apprehended; he therefore thought it 
proper, to acquaint her friends with the 
opinion he entertained of the danger of 
her situation, requesting them to send 
for such other persons of the faculty as 
they might wish should be consulted. 

When we visited her, which was 
about noon, we found her extremely 
restless, complaining of great pain 
about the region of the pubis; her 
face was covered with a cold sweat; 
her pulse was moderately full and ra-
pid; she felt great anxiety about the 
præcordia; her breathing was thick and 
short, with intense thirst, and continual 
|P_15
efforts to vomit. As it was observed 
that she had made no water for some 
time, except what, by the urinous smell 
of the cloths, appeared to have come 
away involuntarily, we determined 
to introduce the catheter; but no-
thing passed, except a little bloody 
sanies. The bleeding was repeated, 
and an antiphlogistic treatment agreed 
upon. 

When we considered her situation 
more fully, and compared the several 
symptoms, of cramp and succeeding 
hemorrhage; the retrocession of the 
child; her severe thirst; vomiting and 
great pain about the region of the pu-
bis, with the symptoms which occurred 
in the case of ruptured uterus published 
by Dr. Douglas; there was such simi-
larity between them, that we agreed in 
the propriety of introducing the hand 
for a more particular examination. 

|P_16
We accordingly visited her again 
about three o'clock, and Mr. William 
Waller proceeded to make an exami-
nation. There was no difficulty in pas-
sing his hand: upon the posterior part 
he felt a considerable tumor, which was 
moveable, and which was not the child's 
head: he likewise found his hand in 
contact with the intestines; whence it 
was evident that our suspicions were 
well grounded. Immediate delivery 
was the only means of relief, and his 
endeavours to get at the feet soon suc-
ceeded; they were brought into the 
vagina, and secured with a noose; but 
it required a considerable degree of ex-
ertion to disengage the breech. After 
the arms were brought down, the head 
followed with ease, little or no dis-
charge ensuing. 

The child was large, and had been 
dead, no doubt, ever since its escape 
from the uterus. The placenta, which 
|P_17
was likewise in the cavity of the ab-
domen, followed without any diffi-
culty. 

Not being determined as to the na-
ture of the tumor, which Mr. Waller 
felt upon the posterior part; as the 
woman had suffered so little in deli-
very, we concurred in opinion, that he 
should again examine the state of the 
parts. Upon introducing his hand, he 
soon sound that the tumor receded be-
fore his fingers, and that it was the 
contracted uterus. It was evident to 
him that the uterus was not ruptured; 
but that there was a laceration of the 
vagina, at the place where it is attached 
to the cervix uteri, through which his 
hand would pass with ease into the ca-
vity of the abdomen. The os internum 
was so contracted, that it would not ad-
mit more than two fingers, and he was 
convinced that it had not been injured. 
She sound herself considerably relieved 
when we lest her at four o'clock. An 
|P_18
anodyne was directed to be taken in 
the evening. 

— 21st.—We visited her early in 
the morning, when we found that her 
spirits were good. Her attendants in-
formed us, that she had passed a much 
better night than could have been ex-
pected. She was capable of turning 
without any inconvenience; her thirst, 
pain in the abdomen, and vomiting, 
were still violent. Anodynes, with salt 
of wormwood and lemon juice, to be 
taken during the effervescence, were di-
rected for her. She had frequent stools 
with tenesmus. The nurse was ordered 
to let her drink be mint tea with rice 
gruel. 

The symptoms evidently arising from 
the injury done to the abdominal vis-
cera, by the child's remaining so long 
among them, after its escape from the 
uterus, induced us to entertain some 
rays of hope, from the success which 
|P_19
had attended the case related by Dr. 
Douglas, that she might recover; but 
the approach of the evening convinced 
us that our hopes were groundless. 
Every symptom was become more ur-
gent, with a very distressing sense of 
suffocation from globus hystericus; she 
had made no water, and, from the uri-
nous smell of the cloths, we could not 
entertain the least doubt but that the 
bladder was ruptured, specially when 
we called to our recollection, that the 
same had been observed before delivery. 

In this distressing state, nothing was 
lest for us to do, more than to alleviate 
her pain, and make the small remainder 
of her life as easy as possible; for which 
purpose, her anodyne medicines were 
repeated. 

—22d.—The persons who watched 
with her during the night informed us, 
that she had been very restless; com-
plained of great pain in her belly, with 
|P_20
intense thirst, and that she had been 
constantly vomiting. Her countenance 
was greatly altered; the quantity of 
fluid thrown up was out of all propor-
tion to the quantity drank; the tenesmus 
still continued, but without any evacu-
ations; her anodynes were repeated, 
and an opiate glyster ordered to be in-
jected in the evening. 

—23d.—We found her more com-
posed, and we understood she had been 
so through the greater part of the night. 
She continued in the same state until 
about eleven o'clock before noon, when 
she died, perfectly sensible. 

We obtained permission to open the 
body the same evening. 

The abdomen was much tumified. 
Upon making a longitudinal incision 
through the integuments, a quantity of 
confined air rushed out. The perito-
neum was inflamed, and in some places 
beginning to sphacelate. The intestines 
|P_21
were remarkably distended with flatus; 
their external coats were tinged with 
yellow, and inflamed through their 
whole extent. The ramifications of the 
vessels appeared of a beautiful red, as if 
they had been injected; some spots were 
observed in several places beginning to 
sphacelate, and they were for the most 
part connected by a slight adhesion to 
each other. The omentum was con-
tracted and inflamed. There was a con-
siderable quantity of bloody serum in 
the cavity of the abdomen. The whole 
of the viscera had that appearance, 
which has been generally observed on 
dissecting women who have died of a 
puerperal fever. 

The uterus and its appendages, in 
situ, appeared perfectly sound, excepting 
the left ovarium, which contained about 
fourteen ounces of a colourless fluid, in 
a single cyst. There was no appearance 
of the vesica urinaria; on passing a ca-
theter, it went immediately into the ca-
|P_22
vity of the abdomen, confirming our 
suspicion that the bladder was ruptured. 
On raising the uterus above the pelvis, 
we were immediately convinced how 
accurate Mr. Waller had been in the 
description he gave us, on examining 
the state of the parts directly after de-
livery. 

The os internum and cervix uteri 
were uninjured; the vagina was thin, 
and was lacerated transversely on the 
superior part, close to its attachment 
to the uterus: the laceration was nearly 
through one half of its circumference, 
on the fore part, but inclining to the left 
side. The bladder, from its connexion 
with the vagina, had suffered at the same 
time, being ruptured through the whole 
of its posterior part, at least in propor-
tion to the size of the laceration which 
had taken place in the vagina; we ob-
served that it had extended to the outer 
surface of the uterus, tearing off an an-
gular piece of its peritoneal coat, about 
|P_23
half an inch in length. The uterus was 
contracted to the usual size it is ob-
served to be, in so short a space after 
delivery; its peritoneal coat near the 
fundus shewed an appearance of inci-
pient mortification. The os #####
was contracted, as Mr. Walller #####
served, so that, without di#i#########
could not introduce more than two 
fingers. 

As the nature of the case was evident, 
we did not proceed further in the dis-
section, but contented ourselves with 
preserving the parts. On making an in-
cision into the uterus, it was found, in 
most places, to be nearly an inch thick; 
its internal surface appearing in a heal-
thy state, and contained a small propor-
tion of the membrana decidua, which 
had been left behind. 

|P_24
LACERATIONS of the vagina 
have been mentioned by authors, 
as, sometimes, happening from labori-
ous parturition; but I do not recollect 
to have heard, or read any account, 
where the child had escaped, by such 
means, into the cavity of the abdomen; 
or that they have ever conceived such 
an accident to be probable. I have se-
lected some cases, which are related as 
ruptures of the uterus, but which are 
apparently accidents of this nature. 
Thus can be reconciled, only, by the 
confusion into which authors have fal-
len, in their divisions of this viscus. 

Anatomists, at present, are pretty 
nearly agreed in dividing the uterus in-
to fundus, cervix, and os internum. 
Supposing that the whole of the uterus 
measures three inches in length, they, 
|P_25
for the most part, allow the fundus to oc-
cupy the space of one inch and a quar-
ter, the cervix to take up one inch and 
three quarters, and the os internum to 
project within the vagina about a quar-
ter of an inch. But, when we consider 
how indeterminate they have heretofore 
been on this subject, we shall not be 
surprised, on examining some of the 
following cases, which are related as 
ruptures of the cervix, to find them la-
cerations of the vagina. From the con-
current testimony of writers, it is evi-
dent, that the vagina has been fre-
quently considered as the collum uteri.

Columbus, in his description of the 
uterus, says, 'Colli vel cervicis nomine 
in utero non corpus illud, quod supra 
descripsimus, fed partem illam intelli-
gimus, in quam mentula, tanquam in 
vaginam immittitur[/1./].' 

|P_26
Bartholinus gives the name of 'Col-
lum breve minus,' to that part which is 
now called the cervix; 'Angusta infe-
rior est inter os uteri et amplitudinem 
incipientem, atque collum breve vocari 
potest, ad differentiam veri et longioris 
colli,' which he terms 'Collum ipsum, 
cervix, five canalis uteri[/2./].'

Deventer expressly takes notice of 
the confusion which attended this divi-
sion of preceding writers: 'Nomen ta-
men vaginæ prefero nomini colli, quia 
sæpius autores, eodem utentes, vaginam 
ab ipso utero, ægre distinguere pos-
sunt[/3./].'

|P_27
[}CASE I. }]
A Case of lacerated, vagina from Van-
der Weil, related, by him as a rup-
ture of the uterus. 

The daughter of Jonas Pergo had 
been delivered of four children, having 
very difficult labours with all of them. 
While pregnant with the fifth, she suf-
fered a considerable degree of uneasi-
ness; her pains were much more ur-
gent, when in labour, and came on 
earlier than in her former pregnancies, 
continuing with violence until the third 
day before delivery, when they ceased. 
The midwife could not, by any endea-
vours, deliver her. The child, which 
was supposed to have been dead some 
|P_28
days, and which appeared afterwards 
to have been the case, from the separa-
tion of the cuticle, presented with its 
hands bent behind its neck, and the 
face obliquely upwards towards the 
pubis. 

The symptoms becoming more and 
more violent, she being not only faint and 
feverish, with oppression on the praecor-
dia, attended with rigors; but having 
vomited up some green fæces, which 
arose, he says, from the fœtus pressing 
upon the rectum, so that they could 
not find their passage thence, Cornelius 
Solingius, an experienced surgeon, was 
sent for with him to her relief. In a 
short time, he delivered her of a dead 
child. As he could not easily bring 
away the after birth, he introduced his 
hand along the funis, but found that it 
was in contact with the intestines, before 
it came to the placenta; which was 
sound, soon after, hanging down, in 
three parts, within the abdomen, out 
|P_29
of the uterus. From the child having 
been expelled three days, the uterus 
was so hard and contracted, that, at 
first, he supposed it to be a scirrhus. 
He separated the placenta from the u-
terus, to which, he says, it still adher-
ed. The cartilage, which connected 
the bones of the pelvis, was soft, and 
they were separated from each other 
nearly the breadth of a finger. 

The woman died the same day, and 
the body was opened on the next, in 
the presence of Vander Weil and his 
brother. 

The abdomen was much tumified. 
On making an incision into it, nothing 
escaped except a quantity of fœtid air, 
and some coagulated blood of a good 
colour, which came, he says, from the 
cotyledons, or mouths of the vessels of 
the uterus, at the time when the pla-
centa was detached from it. He passed 
his hand through the vagina, and again 
|P_30
found himself in contact with the intes-
tines, the uterus receding above the 
pubis. A rupture was observed at the 
inferior and posterior part, just above 
the os internum, at that place where the 
common membrane from the peritone-
um covers and surrounds the uterus, as 
well as the rectum; through which rup-
ture the whole of the child, except the 
parts which presented, had passed into 
the cavity of the abdomen. This he 
assigns as the cause why the pains ceased, 
and the mother became easier, a few 
days before delivery[/4./]. 

In the examination of this case, I shall 
confine my remarks to the delivery of 
the placenta, and the appearances upon 
dissection. 

After the child was delivered, Solin-
gius, finding that the placenta did not 
easily follow, introduced his hand along 
|P_31
the funis, with an intention to extract 
it, but found himself in contact with 
the intestines, the placenta being, 'ex-
tra uterum,' in the cavity of the abdo-
men. The uterus, from which he sup-
poses the child to have escaped some 
days before, was contracted, and felt so 
hard, 'ita ut initio scirrhum crederet.' 
In the next sentence, he speaks of sepa-
rating the placenta from the uterus: 
this cannot be reconciled with what he 
had before related, of the placenta being 
'extra uterum,' otherwise than by sup-
posing that the placenta, while in the 
abdomen, adhered to the external sur-
face of the uterus; its adhesion to the 
surface of the viscera, in some other 
cases, having been found to be very 
considerable[/5./]. 

A review of the circumstances, which 
follow the introduction of his hand, 
will elucidate the case, when compared 
|P_32
with the appearances, which were ob-
served on opening the body, after death. 

In the first place. No mention is 
made of any difficulty in introducing 
the hand through the os internum into 
the cavity of the uterus, which must 
have been considerable, from its con-
tracted state, if the attempt had been 
made. 

Secondly. As his hand came imme-
diately in contact with the intestines, if 
the placenta had been within the uterus, 
the intestines must likewise have been 
within it, which does not by any means 
appear from the narrative. 

And lastly. If his hand had been 
within the cavity of the uterus, how 
could he have judged of the degree of 
its contraction, so as to have thought it, 
at first, to have been a scirrhus? 

|P_33
If we consider the case as a partial 
separation of the vagina, from its at-
tachment to the cervix uteri, then every 
one of these objections are surmounted 
with ease: his hand, on passing along 
the funis, would have found an easy in-
troduction into the cavity of the abdo-
men, and he would have been in con-
tact with the intestines, before his hand 
arrived at the placenta. The uterus 
would have been found on the anterior 
part, and have felt contracted like a 
ball, so that, at first, it might have 
been mistaken for a scirrhus; neither of 
which could have possibly happened if 
his hand had been within its cavity: 
besides, his expression is so clear, in 
respect to its contraction, 'dure admo-
dum compactum atque in secontrac-
tum comperit,' as to leave no room to 
suppose any thing to have been included 
within it. 

We find that on dissection, after re-
lating the external appearance of the 
|P_34
abdomen, and what issued on making 
an incision into it, he passed his hand, 
he says, per vulvam, and again felt the 
intestines; and, what is very material 
in forming a determination on the na-
ture of the case, found the uterus re-
ceding above the pubis, 'recedentemque
supra os pubis uterum reperit.' To use 
the expression of Dr. Douglas, in his 
late, publication, 'it fled before the tips 
of his fingers.'

I think it must be evident to every 
one, that the uterus would not have re-
ceded before his hand, if its attachment 
to the vagina had remained entire. It 
must have resisted the touch. 

The place where the rupture is said 
to have been was at the inferior and 
posterior part, a little above the os in-
ternum, where the common peritoneal 
membrane is continued from the rectum 
to the uterus. 

|P_35
Now the same peritoneal coat which 
surrounds the whole of the abdominal 
viscera, in its passage from the rectum 
to become the external coat of the ute-
rus, is inflected over that part of the 
vagina which is attached to the cervix 
uteri, beginning to form the peritoneal 
coat of the uterus, at the place where 
the vagina is joined to the cervix, a 
little above the os internum. In the 
same place, on the anterior part, the 
vagina was lacerated in the case before 
related; and, I think, on comparing the 
different parts of Vander Wiel's rela-
tion, with each other, it is clear that the 
injury, in both cases, was nearly similar; 
the only difference being, that in one 
the laceration was in the posterior, and 
in the other in the anterior part of the 
vagina. 

|P_36
[}CASE II. }]
A Case of lacerated vagina, as related by 
Bonetus, from Leonardus Dol-
dius.

In the year 1594, a woman of Hage-
naw, in Alsace, 40 years of age, who 
had been the mother of seven children, 
at the full time, but all of them born 
dead, died in labour of the eighth, on 
the third day, without being delivered. 
The night before, her pains had been 
violent in the extreme; the women who 
were present made many efforts to de-
liver her, but they were not able to 
afford her the least help. 

On opening the body, they were very 
cautious in making their incision into 
the abdomen, that they might have a 
|P_37
distinct view of the uterus in situ. The 
muscles were hardly divided, when 
the back of the child was wounded. 
They had no suspicion of what it really 
was, supposing it, at first, to be the u-
terus; but, on continuing the incision, 
they found it to be a full formed fœtus 
(with signs of putridity from the sepa-
ration of the cuticle) without the uterus, 
in the cavity of the abdomen. It lay 
with the face to the sacrum, and its 
body extended at full length. At first, 
nothing preternatural was observed, 
there being no appearance of contu-
sion, wound, ulceration, or abscess. 
They wondered much at the singularity 
of the case; but this was cleared up 
when they sound the uterus torn, rup-
tured, or rather broken off. 

The child was still connected by the 
sunis to the secundines, which were re-
tracted, upon the left side, towards the 
spleen, and adhered so fast that they 
had some difficulty to separate them. 
|P_38
The uterus was so contracted, that it 
did not exceed the size of the placenta. 
Near the cervix, directly under the 
bladder, there was a portion of mem-
brane hanging down, about the thick-
ness of the dissecting knife, and not 
exceeding the breadth of half a palm, 
which was a part of the separated ute-
rus, 'uteri abrupti.'

The rest of the uterus, with its pro-
per orifice, and the secundines were re-
tracted, so that it was totally separated 
from the cervix, or 'sinus muliebris,'
and all the other parts to which it had 
before been attached. He attributes this 
accident to the malconformation of the 
pubis, which was too much flattened in[/6./]. 

The above case requires no comment, 
as I think it is evident that there was a 
total separation of the uterus, from its 
attachment to the vagina. 

|P_39
I remember to have read a case where 
the same accident happened, from the 
violent efforts of an accoucheur to in-
troduce his hand to deliver. 

[}CASE III. }]
The case of Mrs. Manning, as related 
by Dr. Douglas.

We find that the woman, who is the 
subject of this case, was in her 4th preg-
nancy, low in stature, about 30 years of 
age, and of a weak constitution, but, in 
general, healthy. When the Doctor 
was first called to her, the membranes 
had been ruptured eight hours, and the 
pains had continued regular from that 
time: yet though the os tincae was con-
|P_40
siderably dilated, the child did not ad-
vance. He found her extremely rest-
less, complaining of excessive pain in 
the region of the pubis. Each return 
of pain caused her to writhe and twist 
as if suffering from violent colic, very 
unlike the urging throes of common la-
bour; but her pulse was calm and re-
gular, nor did she make any particular 
complaint, excepting of the pain about 
the pubis. This being the state of the 
case, there seemed to be no reason to 
induce him to precipitate the delivery. 

About nine o'clock the same evening, 
the midwife informed him that the pa-
tient had had a discharge of blood from 
the vagina, which, however, did not 
continue; and that the pains had ceased 
about half an hour after six o'clock; 
since which, retching, with an incessant 
craving for drink, had come on. 

He now found her face lengthened, 
and bedewed with cold sweat; her pulse 
|P_41
scarcely to be felt; her breathing short 
and quick, with great anxiety; but still 
complaining of no pain, excepting about 
the pubis. 'By examination in the com-
mon way,' he says, I could distinguish 
nothing, excepting a round moveable 
substance, which I supposed to be the 
head of the child; but being only able 
to reach it with my fingers, I could not 
determine with any certainty what it 
was. The woman appeared to be in 
extremis; and my mind was so wholly 
occupied by her danger, as to preclude 
all reasoning with respect to the cause.'
He determined upon immediate delive-
ry, as the only chance of relief. 'There 
was no difficulty,' he says, 'in passing 
my hand; and the substance which I had 
supposed to be the child, fled before the 
tips of my fingers: by following it, I at 
last found my hand in a cavity, which 
in no sort resembled that of the uterus. 
I was then forcibly and painfully struck 
with the nature of the case; and on ex-
amining all round, with caution and 
|P_42
gentleness, I could with certainty de-
termine that my hand was in the cavity 
of the abdomen: the child being on the 
fore part; on the back part, the con-
tracted uterus like an oblong ball; and 
the intestines hanging among any fin-
gers.' There was no obstruction to the 
turning and extraction of the child, 
excepting in the passage of the 
head through the brim of the pelvis. The 
placenta, which was likewise in the ab-
dominal cavity, had so clung to the in-
testines, that he was again under the 
necessity of introducing his hand to de-
tach it, which was not difficult. 'The 
uterus seemed,' he says, 'to have been 
ruptured transversely, on the lower and 
fore part, some distance above where 
the vagina is connected with it; and it 
was more contracted in its size, than I 
thought possible in the few hours which 
had elapsed since the accident.'

After a variety of changes and alarm-
ing symptoms arising from peritoneal 
|P_43
inflammation, the poor woman fortu-
nately recovered; and in about six weeks 
waited upon the Doctor at his own house, 
to return thanks; when he persuaded 
her to permit his neighbour Dr. Osborn 
to examine per vaginam. He thought 
the os tinæ somewhat more open, ex-
ternally, than it usually is; and Dr. 
Douglas himself fancied he felt rather 
more fulness than is common about the 
cervix uteri: but they both agreed, that 
there was nothing in the touch so dif-
ferent from what is observed in the na-
tural state, as to have excited any idea 
of previous disease, had they not known 
the complaint with which she had been 
afflicted. 

After examining the body of Mrs. 
Wilkins, and ascertaining the nature of 
the injury, I began to consider the above 
case in a different light, from what I 
did on the first perusal of it. The Doctor 
represents it as a case of ruptured ute-
|P_44
I now perceive it to be a case of 
lacerated vagina. 

The circumstance which he relates, 
of a 'round moveable substance,' which 
upon introducing his hand, he found 
to be 'the contracted uterus like an ob-
long ball,' was so similar to what Mr. 
Waller described, and which every one 
of us had an opportunity of observing 
during the dissection, that I have no 
doubt remaining in my own mind, that 
there could have been any difference 
between the two cases. Mr. Waller and 
the other gentlemen who were present 
concur likewise with me in the same 
opinion. 

In the preceding pages, I have had 
occasion, on a review of the case from 
Vander Weil, to advert to a similar oc-
currence, when I expressed my doubts 
how the degree of contraction can be 
ascertained, unless the hand of the ac-
|P_45
coucheur has been passed on the outside 
of the uterus. I cannot suppose that, 
while the fundus is contracted above 
the rupture, the os internum will remain 
for several hours, nay days, dilated, and 
shew no disposition to contract. The 
fibres, I should apprehend, which form 
its texture, will assist its contraction in 
as great a degree as that of the fundus. 

Dr. Douglas, as well as Vander Weil, 
found that the uterus receded on intro-
ducing his hand. Is it possible that the 
uterus should have receded before his 
hand, if its attachment had been entire? 
It must have made some resistance. Yet 
we find that, when he touched it, it fled, 
and upon following it, his hand went, 
not into the uterus, but into a cavity 
which in no sort resembled it. Can it 
be supposed from this relation, so point-
edly marked, that his fingers ever passed 
the os internum? The uterus must have 
been fixed, if he had entered into its 
cavity; but he says, that he was obliged 
|P_46
to follow it, and at length found his 
hand within the abdomen, the 'child 
being on the fore part, on the back part 
the contracted uterus, like an oblong ball'. 

[}CASE IV. }]
A Case of lacerated vagina from Pou-
teau, related by him as a rupture 
of the uterus. 

He was called to the assistance of a 
woman, who had been a considerable 
time in labour, under the care of a mid-
wife; she had been seized the day be-
fore with a hemorrhage, on which the 
child, which had before presented with 
|P_47
the head, was no longer felt. On exa-
mination, his hand entered at once into 
a cavity, which appeared large; on the 
fore part, he felt a round substance, of 
the size, but not the solidity, of a child's
 head; yet there was not any thing to be 
felt, which could assure him of a child 
being there. The woman died soon af-
ter, without being further examined. 
On opening the body, the child and 
placenta were found in the cavity of the 
abdomen, entirely out of the uterus, 
which was of the size of a child's head 
of five years old, and was the round 
body which had been felt per vaginam.
The rupture was on the posterior and 
interior part, and then about three or 
four inches long[/7./]. 

When the easy introduction of his 
hand into 'a cavity which appeared 
large,' at a time when the 'uterus was 
contracted to the size of a child's head;'
|P_48
his perceiving by the touch, during his 
attempt to deliver, 'a round substance,'
which afterwards, on dissection, he found 
to be the contracted uterus, and the 
state of the rupture, being then about 
'three or four inches long[/8./],' are con-
sidered, I think that I shall not be too 
hasty in pronouncing it to have been a 
separation of the uterus from its poste-
rior attachment to the vagina. 

AS in ruptures of the uterus, so in la-
cerations of the vagina, if the head of 
the child should be advanced so far in-
|P_49
to the pelvis as to be wedged, before a 
laceration takes place, it will remain 
there, and we shall be deprived of one 
criterion, the retrocession of the pre-
senting part, to guide us; the cessation 
of the true pains must lead us then to 
judge of the nature of the case, when 
attended with vomiting and other symp-
toms, as described in the relation of the 
preceding narratives. The following 
cases is an instance of this kind. 

[}CASE V. }]
A case of lacerated vagina, where the 
head was engaged in the pelvis, before 
the accident took place; communi-
cated by a friend. 

A. B. aged about 30, was taken in 
labour with her third child, on April 
15th, 1785, at four oclock in the morn-
|P_50
ing. The waters soon came away. On 
examination, the head of the child was 
found to be low in the pelvis. A con-
siderable stricture was observed in the 
vagina, and the sacrum projected rather 
forward at its apex. About five hours 
after she was first taken in labour, she 
began to complain of pains in her belly, 
which she distinguished from those of 
labour. At three oclock in the after-
noon, a physician, an eminent teacher 
of midwifery in London, was called in, 
at which time, from the degree of stric-
ture, the part of the head which pre-
sented could not be exactly ascertained. 
He ordered her an injection, which was 
given, but without any effect. On en-
quiring, it appeared, that since she be-
gan to complain of the pain in her 
belly, the labour pains had ceased. A 
single blade was introduced with ease, 
and some endeavours made to deliver, 
but without success. The Doctor, con-
sidering it wrong to struggle against na-
ture, or do any thing without the assis-
|P_51
tance of pains, left her, giving directions 
for an enema to be injected, and four or 
six ounces of blood to be taken away. 

He returned at half past five, when 
very little alteration could be perceived. 
She had no labour pains, and the pains 
continued the same in the abdomen, 
which she now complained was become 
tender. Injections were ordered, copious 
and stimulant; four were given without 
any return. The forceps were at length 
applied, and used moderately, with an 
intent to bring on a return of true pains; 
but a slight discharge of the glysters was 
the only effect. A little ground was at 
length gained, and, by encreasing the 
force for a considerable time, she was 
delivered of a dead child: the placenta 
came away immediately after. She 
made water frequently during the la-
bour, and had it drawn off before the 
use of the forceps. She was thirsty, 
and vomited frequently, though little in 
quantity. By her cries, she did not seem 
|P_52
to suffer more pain, than is usually felt 
in her delivery. 

Her pulse were quick after she was 
in bed; she was disposed to vomit, and 
passed a restless night; the pain in her 
belly continued distinct from after pain. 
She lived until the morning of the 18th, 
during which time her pulse were gene-
rally 130 or more, her skin hot, she com-
plained of great pain and tenderness of 
the abdomen; she vomited frequently, 
and her urgings to vomit were great. 

From no local injury being supposed 
to have happened, and from the pre-
sence of the lochia, and other symp-
toms, the case was considered as truly 
puerperal, and treated as such. 

On dissection, the intestines were found 
to be inflamed, with an exudation of 
lymph on their surfaces, and the gall 
bladder was large and distended with 
bile. The uterus was contracted to the 
|P_53
size of double fist, black, and begin-
ning to sphacelate. The vagina was 
found to be lacerated at its connexion 
to the cervix uteri, anteriorly, no ves-
tige of the stricture remaining[/9./]. 

It is to be observed, that the woman 
had fallen down, a day or two before 
she was taken in labour, and that the 
same gentleman had delivered her, two 
years before, with forceps, on account 
of the same stricture. 

How far the sixth case quoted by 
Dr. Douglas might be similar to the 
above, I have some doubts; but the 
circumstances attending it render it 
probable. 

|P_54
It appears, that the woman had been 
in labour the best part of the day, with 
very strong pains, before the rupture is 
supposed to have taken place. The 
head was firmly wedged in the pelvis; 
but, in attempting to open it, suddenly 
gave way to the force applied. 

Now, let us consider for one moment 
the nature of the case. If a rupture 
had taken place in the uterus, as the 
head was firmly wedged in the pelvis, 
the feet must have been the part pro-
truded; whence, when I recollect the 
strong contractile power of the uterus[/10./], 
and the length of time intervening be-
tween the attempt to open the head, 
and the time when the rupture is sup-
|P_55
posed to have happened, I cannot per-
suade myself that the child would have 
escaped so easy into the cavity of the 
abdomen as he found it did. 

If the vagina was lacerated, it is easy 
to account for the sudden retrocession 
of the child. It is evident, that the ute-
rus being only attached in one place, 
its resistance against the pressure could 
only be partial; the fundus would be 
inclined, and the os internum raised in 
proportion; therefore, when the head 
was pressed back, it would find an easy 
admittance, through the laceration, into 
the cavity of the abdomen; from the 
endeavours of the uterus to free itself, 
the body with the placenta would soon 
follow. The rupture being near the cer-
vix is, I think, some support to what I 
have advanced. I shall likewise endea-
vour to shew, in another place, that the 
placenta being in the cavity of the ab-
domen, may be considered as a collate-
ral proof. 

|P_56
I am inclined to believe, that the 
whole of the child very seldom escapes 
from a rupture of the uterus. I am, 
however, very well convinced, that it is 
always the consequence of a laceration 
of the vagina, unless it should happen 
to be as firmly wedged in the pelvis as 
in the cases I have just noticed. 

On a review of fifteen cases quoted 
by Dr. Douglas, we shall find, that the 
child escaped into the cavity of the ab-
domen in seven; in No. VI. VII. X. XI. 
XII. XIII. and XIV. I have already 
endeavoured to shew that No. VI. and 
XI. were lacerations of the vagina, and 
I shall draw some inferences from No. 
XII. when I come to speak of the pla-
centa being out of the uterus, tending 
to show a degree of probability of that 
being of the same nature. Of No. VII. 
|P_57
we have a very uncertain account, as, 
from motives of delicacy, it is not par-
ticularly entered into. No. X. without 
doubt, must have been a ruptured ute-
rus. I think that the two last cannot be 
considered in point, as they were at an 
early period of gestation, and the acci-
dents happened from external violence. 

In the remaining eight, No. I. II. III. 
IV. V. VIII. IX. and XV. only part 
of the child had escaped from the rup-
ture; indeed, in the two first, it does 
not appear that any part had escaped. 
It is therefore evident that, setting aside 
the two cases from external violence, in 
only one out of thirteen the child es-
caped wholly from a rupture of the 
uterus. 

I am also inclined to believe, that the 
placenta being in the cavity of the ab-
domen, is an occurrence which very sel-
dom happens, excepting in those cases 
where the vagina is lacerated. The 
|P_58
size of the rupture, when it happens in 
the uterus, must be diminished almost 
immediately after the child has escaped, 
and the contraction of the uterus must 
be encreased by its endeavours to pro-
pel the placenta; it is therefore almost 
impossible that the placenta should es-
cape into the abdomen: it might indeed 
sometimes happen, if the funis should 
be much twisted round the child's neck 
or body. In almost every case, where 
we have a certainty that the accident 
was a rupture of the uterus, we find 
that the placenta remained behind. 

When a laceration takes place in the 
vagina, the propulsion of the placenta 
is not different from what happens in 
common parturition; as every contrac-
tion of the uterus forces it towards the 
os internum, from whence it passes after the 
child into the cavity of the abdo-
men. But when there is a rupture in 
the uterus, every contraction must be 
an impediment to its propulsion, by di-
|P_59
minishing the size of the aperture, thro' 
which it must pass, to be found among 
the viscera. 

In the case of Mrs. Wilkins, where 
we can entertain no doubt of the nature 
of the accident, the placenta was found 
with the child in the cavity of the ab-
domen. In that of Mrs. Manning, in 
those from Vander Weil, Bonetus, and 
Pouteau, and in the sixth case quoted 
by Dr. Douglas, all of which I have en-
deavoured to shew were of the same na-
ture, the placenta was likewise found 
among the viscera. 

There are two more instances, among 
the cases quoted by Dr. Douglas, where 
the same occurrence is said to have hap-
pened; in No. X. and XII. 

The first, communicated by Dr. Garth-
shore, is against the opinion I have form-
ed, that being, as I have before observed, 
evidently a rupture of the uterus. In the 
|P_60
other, from Saviard, it appears, that the 
child presented favourably, with every 
appearance that the labour would be 
soon finished; yet the pains ceased at 
once, after two days continuance; the 
presenting part receded, and only the 
placenta was to be felt. She died un-
delivered; and when the body was 
opened, the child and secundines were 
in the abdomen among the viscera, the 
feet of the child touching the stomach 
of the mother. The intestines were all 
fretted, and the omentum rotten and 
stinking, but the uterus was of the na-
tural appearance. I have not Saviard's 
book to refer to; but I think, from a re-
view of this account, I shall be able to 
draw some inferences in my favour. 

From the manner in which he ex-
presses himself, that the uterus was of 
its natural appearance, we may be led 
to suppose that no injury had happened 
to it. When we recollect the circum-
stance, that, after the presenting part 
|P_61
had receded, the placenta alone was to 
be felt, I apprehend but a small degree 
of doubt concerning the nature of the 
case will remain. 

After the body was opened, the se-
cundines as well as the child were found 
in the abdomen. As the placenta was 
to be felt on examination, after the 
rupture had taken place, how can it be 
supposed that the rupture was in the 
uterus? The uterus must have been at 
that time considerably contracted, and 
the aperture so much diminished, as to 
have rendered the escape of the pla-
centa impossible. 

Hence I am clearly of opinion, that 
the placenta being felt on examination, 
after the rupture had taken place, and 
being afterwards found in the abdomen, 
is a great proof that the accident was 
not in the uterus, but in the vagina. 

|P_62
Out of eight cases, therefore, where 
the placenta was found with the child 
in the cavity of the abdomen, there is 
the greatest probability to suppose that 
seven of them were lacerations of the 
vagina. 

The difficulty attending delivery, 
when the vagina is lacerated, must be 
very trifling, when compared to that 
which will occur if the accident hap-
pens in the uterus. In the case of 
Mrs. Wilkins, the only resistance was 
in bringing down the breech, which 
all the gentlemen present agreed arose 
from the protuberance of the child's 
belly projecting over the fundus of the 
contracted uterus; which, as the extrac-
tion went on, was brought lower down, 
and, of consequence, pressed the breech 
of the child over the pubis: after this 
was overcome, not the least difficulty 
|P_63
whatever occurred. In the case of Mrs. 
Manning, it does not appear that there 
was any resistance to the delivery of the 
breech; but we find there was a consi-
derable obstruction in the passage of the 
head through the pelvis. I am some-
what inclined to believe that this might 
have arisen from the same cause, al-
though Dr. Douglas supposes it to have 
proceeded from the narrowness of the 
pelvis. 

In those cases, where the uterus has 
been ruptured, the difficulty will be en-
creased or diminished, in proportion as 
more or less of the child has escaped 
into the cavity of the abdomen. 

If the rupture should be so extensive 
as to admit the child to escape entirely 
out of the uterus, from the natural dis-
position of its fibres, the uterus will al-
most immediately contract, and the size 
of the rupture will become less, of con-
sequence, in proportion to the degree 
|P_64
of contraction which takes place. If 
the rupture should be so small as to ad-
mit the protrusion of part of the child 
only, a stricture will be formed upon 
such part as has escaped, which will re-
quire a considerable degree of force to 
overcome, as, from its endeavours to 
expel the part which remains, the ute-
rus will still continue to contract. In 
performing the cæsarean operation, M. 
Soumain found that the edges of the in-
cision made in the uterus pressed so close 
upon the fœtus, that he could hardly get 
his fingers in to extract it[/11./]. Hence we 
may account for the alternate though 
ineffectual pains, which, in some cases, 
have been observed to continue for some 
time after the rupture has taken place; 
and I believe we may be led to form a 
probable opinion that, when this hap-
pens, some part of the child still re-
mains within the uterus. 

|P_65
The hand of the accoucheur, when 
he sits down to deliver, must be passed 
through the os internum into the cavity 
of the uterus, and from thence through 
the rupture. The difficulty attending 
the passage of the hand will be in pro-
portion to the degree of contraction; 
but, unfortunately, it is very seldom 
that the nature of the case is known so 
early, as to induce us to make any at-
tempt to deliver before the uterus is 
considerably contracted. After the re-
sistance from the diminished state of the 
rupture is overcome, and the hand pas-
sed into the abdomen, the feet, in gene-
ral, may be soon found, and brought 
down with some ease; but as the ope-
rator proceeds, and the legs come for-
ward, every inch of the child, as the 
extraction takes place, will create a fresh 
resistance from its increasing bulk. The 
irritation which must be given to the 
uterus, by the introduction of the hand, 
will increase its endeavours to contract, 
and make considerable addition to the 
|P_66
difficulty. Caldani, of Bologna, in a 
letter to Haller, relates some experi-
ments made on the uterus of a bitch, 
which show the great degree of contrac-
tion that takes place even after death, 
on any stimulus being applied to it[/12./]. 

The nearer likewise the rupture hap-
pens to the fundus or cervis, the greater 
degree of ease or difficulty will ensue. 
In the first instance, the extraction will 
be made nearly in a direct line. In the 
other, and which most commonly hap-
pens, that part of the child which re-
mains in the abdomen must form an 
angle with the feet and legs, while they 
are passing through the vagina, and the 
degrees of such angle will be decreased 
or increased, in proportion as the rup-
ture may happen to be, either near the 
cervix, or further towards the fundus. 

Very little more exertion will be re-
quired than what is obliged to be made 
|P_67
use of in a common case, where the 
child is turned, when the feet are the 
only parts that have escaped. When 
the legs have protruded as far as the 
knee, the resistance will be considera-
bly more powerful; as, in such case, 
the hand must be passed to a greater 
distance through the rupture in search 
of the feet: but how much more must 
the difficulty be increased, if the aper-
ture should be large enough to admit 
the child to pass out of the uterus as far 
as the hips? Indeed I apprehend this 
situation to be worse than when the 
whole of the child has escaped; as, in 
that case, there may be some hope that 
the resistance might be overcome, and 
the child extracted by the feet; but 
when the child has escaped as far as the 
hips, such a very considerable distension, 
if not further laceration of the rupture, 
must take place, and so great a degree 
of force must be made use of to over-
come the contraction, in order to gain 
sufficient room to bring the feet back, as 
|P_68
leave little room to hope for success. 
In fact, when I reflect on the very great 
difficulties that must arise when any 
considerable part of the child has es-
caped, I do not at all wonder that au-
thors have concurred in pronouncing 
the accident mortal, and giving no en-
couragement for attempting relief, ex-
cept by having recourse to the cæsarean 
operation. 

In addition to Mrs. Manning's case, 
of which we have had occasion to speak 
so often, eight others are adduced by 
Dr. Douglas, to evince the ease with 
which delivery may be performed in 
cases of ruptured uterus. No. I. IV. V. 
VI. VII. VIII. IX. and XV. On read-
ing them over with attention, I have 
observed that the situation of the child, 
in most of them, was such as to create 
the smaller degree of resistance, accord-
ing to the opinion I have entertained 
in respect to the difficulty attending de-
livery. 

|P_69
In the first, which was related to Heis-
ter by Rungius, it does not appear that 
the child, or any part of it, had ever 
been in the cavity of the abdomen. 
Indeed Dr. Douglas is of the same opi-
nion himself, as he says, 'the recovery of 
the patients, No. I. and II. may have 
been in a great measure owing to the 
viscera having sustained little or no in-
jury, as there is no reason to suppose 
that the child in either case had been in 
the cavity of the abdomen[/13./].' This may 
give us some idea of the prospect we 
have of recovery when a rupture takes 
place, but cannot be brought to show 
the ease with which delivery may be 
performed, when the whole or part of 
the child has escaped from the uterus. 

In No. IV. which is taken from La 
Motte, observation 317, the feet were 
the only parts out of the uterus, and 
the rupture was at the fundus; whence 
|P_70
the extraction was not attended with 
much difficulty, for two reasons: the 
endeavours made use of were in a di-
rect line, in the first instance, and in the 
second, the feet being the only parts that 
had escaped, the hand of the accou-
cheur was introduced until it came to 
the knees, so as to bring them down 
and disengage the feet; after which, no 
more difficulty would arise than what 
happens in a common case of turning. 

In No. V. likewise from La Motte, 
observation 318, it appears that the child 
had escaped out of the uterus as far as 
the hips, or even further, part of the 
body being in the cavity of the abdo-
men. The child was turned, he says, 
and extracted with considerable ease; 
en moins d'un miserere, as he expresses 
it himself. I cannot think, with Dr. 
Douglas, that La Motte's observations 
are related with such plainness and can-
dour, as to claim our most perfect con-
fidence. In this instance, we have a 
|P_71
case the most difficult that can possibly 
happen, and yet the delivery was per-
formed with the greatest ease imagi-
nable. I really am of opinion, that the 
relation is not founded in fact: I ap-
prehend that he has either magnified 
the proportion of the child which was 
out of the uterus, or that he has con-
cealed the difficulty he must have met 
with, in case such a considerable part of 
the child had been in the abdomen. 

I have advanced some reasons, in a 
former part of these observations, when 
speaking of the head of the child being 
wedged in the pelvis, at the time when 
a laceration happens, tending to show 
that No. VI. was a laceration of the 
vagina. 

We have a very defective account of 
No. VII. as from motives of delicacy 
to the gentleman who attended the pa-
tient, Dr. Douglas does not think him-
self at liberty to enter more particular-
ly into it. 

|P_72
In No. VIII. from Peu, the time elap-
sed between the accident and the deli-
very is not related; but I am inclined 
to believe that it was done very soon 
after, from the apparent facility with 
which it was accomplished. There ap-
pears likewise some deficiency in the 
contractile power of the uterus, by the 
excessive hemorrhage that followed. We 
find however that he 'delivered with 
great caution to avoid doing further in-
jury to the uterus.' This seems to inti-
mate some degree of resistance, altho' 
none is mentioned. 

Dr. Douglas observes, that the great 
contractile power of the uterus is fa-
vourable to the process of healing, by 
bringing the divided parts more into 
contact; 'but,' he says, 'the presence 
of any considerable extraneous sub-
stance, even in the abdomen, seems, in 
some degree to counteract this power of 
contraction[/14./].' If the uterus after the expul-
|P_73
sion of its contents, does not con-
tract as in common parturition, we must 
expect a considerable flooding. In the 
above case, we are told that it was ex-
cessive. In the cases of Mrs. Wilkins, 
and the others which I have related as 
lacerations of the vagina, the hemorrhage 
was not very great[/15./], and the uterus was 
found contracted to the usual size it 
would have been, in the same space of 
time, if no extraneous body had been in 
the cavity of the abdomen. 

In No. IX. from Steidele, it appears 
that the head had escaped from the 
rupture, he brought down the feet with 
ease, but found some difficulty in ex-
|P_74
tracing the rest of the foetus. This dif-
faculty must evidently have arisen from 
the stricture formed by the edges of the 
rupture round the child's neck; whence 
I think it cannot be considered as much 
support, to evince the ease with which 
delivery is performed, any more than 
the last case, where the patient expired 
while the accoucheur was endeavouring 
to bring the head through the pelvis. 

Lacerations of the vagina, I have 
before observed, have been taken notice 
of by authors, yet it does not appear that 
they have had any idea of the child's 
escaping by such means into the cavity 
of the abdomen. If the case which gave 
rise to these observations, in which the 
nature of the accident could not be 
mistaken, and my reasoning on the dif-
ferent cases I have adduced, are allow-
|P_75
ed to have any weight, I think I may 
venture to draw the following conclu-
sions. 

First, that the whole of the child es-
capes, into the cavity of the abdomen, 
much oftener from a laceration of the va-
gina than from a rupture of the uterus. 

Secondly, That, from the little diffi-
culty with which delivery is accomplish-
ed in lacerations of the vagina, there is 
a greater prospect of recovery in such 
accidents, than when the uterus is the 
seat of the injury. 

It is evident that the gloomy idea of 
inevitable death has not only been the 
means of checking such endeavours as 
might have been sometimes successful, 
but that it has likewise been often the 
means of preventing us from knowing 
the real nature of the injury. I hope 
practitioners in future will, from the for-
tunate event of the case of Mrs. Man-
|P_76
ning, related by Dr. Douglas, and the 
new light thrown on the subject by the 
case I have related of Mrs. Wilkins, 
entertain a more favourable opinion of 
the success likely to attend their endea-
vours, in a situation where nothing but 
immediate delivery can afford the least 
prospect of recovery. 

When first I made my private remarks 
on Mrs. Wilkins's case, I did not intend 
to enter further into the subject, than to 
draw the case up sair, and send it to 
some periodical publication, as worthy 
the attention of the medical world. But 
the similarity between it and that of Mrs. 
Manning was so striking, that the more 
I considered it, the more reasons I saw 
to induce me to publish it in the pre-
sent form. 

The nature of the subjct has obliged 
me to enter very fully into the merits 
of Dr. Douglas's case. That he should 
be liable to cr# in forming an opinion 
|P_77
on the nature of the accident, is not to 
be wondered at, when we consider how 
silent authors have been upon it, and 
how seldom accidents of this nature oc-
cur. I have not the honour of being 
known to him; but I am confident, 
from the liberality of his sentiments as 
a gentleman, that he will not consider 
the liberty I have taken as personal, or 
in any other light than as a discharge 
of the duty every man in the profession 
owes to the world. It has a claim upon 
us to elucidate any occult part of the 
science, and every man is bound by the 
laws of humanity to comply with it, 
whenever an opportunity offers. Ex-
empla rara non reticenda, etiam causa 
incognita; ita enim scitu digna infinita 
præteribuntur. 

FINIS. 
