
|P_
[}TO 
His MAJESTY. }]
Most Gracious Sovereign, 

THE object of the following 
sheets is to explain to your 
Majesty the nature of your late ill- 
ness. I have been anxious in my in- 
quiries concerning its origin and pro- 
gress. All diseases of a similar nature 
admit of a speedy cure, when properly 
treated. I have therefore been de- 
sirous, as a loyal and affectionate sub- 
ject, to offer my sentiments upon your 
Majesty's deranged state of health. 

|P_
The thoughts which are inserted 
in the following sheets may perhaps 
be of some utility to your Majesty. 
And my intentions will be quite ac- 
complished, if they contribute, in the 
smallest degree, to the restoration of 
your health, and to the prevention of 
relapses. 

I am, 
Your Majesty's 
Most loyal and devoted 
Subject and servant, 
ROBERT JONES. 

Salisbury, Jan. 1, 1789. 

|P_
[}INTRODUCTION. }]
THE pathology and practice of medi- 
cine are (of all the arts and sciences) 
the least which approach to certainty and 
to truth; and the practitioners of physic 
are therefore too often disposed to appeal to 
conjecture, analogy, and probability, in 
their judgment and treatment of most dis- 
eases, rather than to reason, philosophy, 
and a scientific discernment of causes and 
effects. 

Even from the infancy of this art, we 
find reasoning from false principles pre- 
|P_iv
vail, instead of observing, with accuracy, 
the uniform course of nature. The symp- 
toms of diseases are, therefore, more care- 
fully noticed than their causes; and the 
practice of physic is, consequently, more 
influenced by effects than by causes, which 
should be the solid basis upon which all 
reasoning concerning diseases ought to be 
established. 

The innovation which was introduced 
in the practice of physic by the celebrated 
Dr. Sydenham, was of essential importance, 
so far as it was calculated to establish a pro- 
per and rational method of practice in all 
diseases of a phlogistic or inflammatory 
nature; such as the pleurisy, small-pox, 
measles, and diseases of this description. 
|P_v
But it is very evident, that in those of an 
opposite nature, such as nervous fevers, 
palsies, apoplexies, epilepsies, and all dis- 
eases of this nature, it must produce a 
different effect: and this is completely 
proved, by its bringing on, in these modi- 
fications of disease, the very worst of conse- 
quences, and even death. 

The principles and practice of this dis- 
tinguished physician have therefore had a 
bad effect, so far as they have been the 
means of introducing a dangerous practice 
in nine tenths of the diseases of mankind. 
For they have found their way into all the 
principal schools of physic in Europe, and 
prevail, to a great extent in the practice of 
medicine, all over the world at this present 
time. 

|P_vi
All nervous diseases, and fevers in par- 
ticular, arise more frequently from domestic 
anxieties, and passions of the mind, such as 
grief, disappointment, and despair, than 
from any other causes whatsoever. And 
in order to remove them, it is evident, that 
to increase the cause is not the method to 
remove the disease. But the idea that ple- 
thora, or too great a quantity of blood ex- 
ists in the body, and is therefore the cause 
of these diseases, is a most pernicious doc- 
trine; consequently bleeding, cupping, a 
spare diet, purging, and applications of this 
nature, are supposed to be efficacious in re- 
moving of these several diseases; and more 
especially when they affect athletic and ro- 
bust people. This supposed cause, there- 
|P_vii
fore, points out to a most dangerous method 
of cure. 

It has been the study of a great part of 
my life to inquire into the defects which 
prevail so universally in the practice of 
physic; and I hope that the observations 
I have made, and the improvements I have 
in future to suggest, may be of some uti- 
lity. The bulk of mankind are averse 
to the study of physic, from the tech- 
nical terms, the endless multiplication of 
causes, and the numerous uncouth names 
for diseases and their remedies, which pre- 
vail so universally; therefore private gen- 
tlemen were never remarkable for their 
knowledge of this art, although they have 
distinguished themselves often by their deep 
|P_viii
inquiries into law, antiquities, &c. A Sel- 
den and a Spelman were private gentle- 
men; and no men have been more keen 
in their researches concerning points of law 
and constitutional topics. 

IT is therefore much to be lamented, 
that men of fortune, rank, and learning, 
do not bend their minds to inquiries into 
subjects of so much importance to mankind 
as the healing art. The healing art is 
surely the most interesting to our natures 
of any whatsoever; and yet men of dis- 
tinction and consequence in general treat 
it as a department of knowledge beneath 
their notice [/1./]. The practice of physic in 
|P_ix
Great Britain is, at this present time, to 
be considered as the result of applying Dr. 
Boerhaave's and Dr. Cullen's principles 
to practice. These systems have been most 
compleatly exploded, both as false in their 
principles, and most pernicious in their 
practice [/2./]. And yet the advocates for these 
systems of medicine are suffered to domi- 
neer, as it were, over the sufferings of 
mankind. 

The method of treating of nervous fe- 
vers, of every description, is in a lamentable 
condition indeed. We hear of those that 
survive; and the newspapers inform us of 
some that are dead. We cease to inquire 
into causes, and we sit down contented 
|P_x
with viewing of effects. It is, I am for- 
ward to say, owing to the mismanagement 
of the fair sex after laying in, that we hear 
of the death of so many. It is very likely 
that they may experience a little fever at 
this time; but ignorance and mismanage- 
ment at this period is likely to convert it 
into a nervous, or putrid fever, and death. 
All mankind experience a pre-disposition 
to diseases, before they announce them- 
selves with all their formality and terrors [/3./]. 
|P_xi
When the disease takes place, we are not 
in a condition to help ourselves, and we 
therefore are obliged to send for the advice 
of those who are supposed to be qualified to 
|P_xii
understand it. The patient, at this time, 
is perhaps restless* [/4./]

[/5./] , with a severe and heavy 
feeling in the head, cold chills, with great 
lassitude, and full of melancholy apprehen- 
sions. Or he may labour under a delirium, 
and raging fever. An error at this time is 
irretrievable; and hence the necessity of 
great judgment, and a nice discernment of 
causes, in the physician. Bleeding, blister- 
ing, vomiting, and purging, will at this 
|P_xiii
time encrease the malady, and, eventually, 
bring on death. The delirium arises from 
a weakened condition of the nervous and 
vascular system in general, but more espe- 
cially in the brain. Sudorifics and opiates 
produce a temporary relief; and it behoves 
those who administer these medicines, to 
take particular care that the patient is not 
exposed to the smallest degree of cold 
during their operation, or the delirium will 
be encreased, and all the symptoms of the 
disease aggravated to an alarming degree. 

I have had the management of a great 
number of patients labouring under ner- 
vous or putrid fevers, and have uniformly 
been successful in the treatment of this 
|P_xiv
dangerous disease. But I have observed, 
and I have abundance of proofs to establish 
my observation, that it sometimes happens, 
that what is called a state of insanity, is 
the consequence of these fevers. 

A continual state of delirium will 
either bring on death, or a considerable re- 
laxation in the blood vessels of the brain, 
which will sine vi a tergo, admit of more 
blood within them, than they were, in 
their vigorous and healthy state, capable of 
receiving; just in the same manner that 
severe study, hard drinking, severe vomit- 
ing, and the application of leeches to eyes 
which are inflamed through weakness, will 
produce a greater degree of inflammation 
|P_xv
in them, by weakening still more these 
parts [/6./]. 

|P_xvi
There is no affliction more painful to 
man than the gout; and yet important dis- 
coveries have been made of late, in order 
to shew that it admits of a speedy cure and 
easy management. And I am well con- 
vinced, from my own experience, that the 
fear and apprehensions of what takes place 
in fits of this disease, often produces what 
is called a relapse. The apprehension of 
the past feelings, and pains, generally 
brings on a renewal of the disease. And 
physicians ought to be particularly care- 
ful to prevent their patients from going 
|P_xvii
out into the cold in a state of convales- 
cence. Cold applied to the body in this 
state, and especially at this time of the 
year, will generally produce a relapse; and 
I suspect that his Majesty has experienced, 
from this cause alone, disagreeable conse- 
quences, and that very lately. In a state 
of convalescence, the mind is always me- 
lancholy and dejected; and whatever weak- 
ens the body at this time, will, to a cer- 
tainty, bring on a return of the disease. 
Excessive heat in sultry weather produces 
nearly the same effects. 

In this treatise I have endeavoured to be 
as short and as concise as possible. But 
in a future publication, which I have in 
contemplation, I intend to offer my opi- 
|P_xviii
nions at some length, concerning some dis- 
eases which are known by the name of 
Opprobria Medicorum.[/7./]

|P_
[}AN INQUIRY, &c. }]
THERE is not a disease which assumes 
a greater variety of appearances, nor 
has given occasion to the loquacity and de- 
cided opinions of practitioners of Medicine, 
than the complaint which has for some 
time past afflicted our most amiable Sove- 
reign. At one time it is supposed to be 
the Gout, at other times the Hypochon- 
driasis, and at others a Nervous Fever: 
nay, it is distinguished by almost every 
name which is congenial to the medical 
dogmas of practitioners of physic. 

|P_2
It unfortunately happens to mankind, 
that the method of living which Physi- 
cians in general observe, is likely to esta- 
blish a good state of health; and hence 
arises their implicit faith in books and sys- 
timatical writers. They are therefore sel- 
dom harrassed with those complaints, which 
so constantly fall to the lot of social, and 
convivial spirits, which are commonly 
Fevers, the Rheumatism, flatulent Com- 
plaints, severe nervous Feelings in the 
Head, and over every part of the body, 
and the Gout. But while habits of con- 
viviality produce these effects, the opposite 
extreme, such as abstinence in wine and 
animal food, and so forth, are attended with 
precisely the same consequences, and this 
state is completely demonstrated in the pre- 
sent deranged condition of his Majesty's 
health. 

|P_3
I have long been an enemy to Dr. 
Cullen's practice in general [/8./]; for I have 
seen it so often attended with the most fa- 
tal consequences, and more especially in 
Fevers [/9./]. The natural termination of Fe- 
vers is in a state of delirium, and, ulti- 
mately, in death, if a deranged condition 
of the intellectual powers do not intervene 
to prevent the dissolution of nature. This 
state is called by the name of Madness: 
and if human invention was absolutely ne- 
cessary to operate this effect, the method 
now in use among practitioners of medi- 
cine is compleatly equal to produce it. 

Let me ask this question, What is it 
that produces the disease known by the 
name of a nervous, or putrid Fever? Every 
physician, who has a grain of common 
sense, will answer, that it is produced by 
|P_4
debilitating causes! But in order to re- 
fine upon these causes, and to spin a web of 
their own creation, they will insist upon 
the addition of contagion, effluvia from 
putrid substances, exhalations from marshy 
grounds, &c. &c. 

The penetrating Rousseau wisely says, 
that "science which instructs, and me- 
dicine which cures, are both undoubt- 
edly very good; but science which deceives, 
and medicine which kills, are bad. Teach 
us how to discriminate them—there lies 
the difficulty of the question." 

There never was an art more full of de- 
ception than the practice of physic: and 
this is completely illustrated, by the fatal 
termination of most of the diseases which 
are inflicted by Providence upon mankind. 
We are, in general, disposed to refer the 
causes of fevers, and other diseases, to the 
|P_5
influence of physical causes alone, and to 
overlook the operation of moral causes al- 
together; whereas it can be proved, that 
moral causes are chiefly the forerunners of 
most diseases depending upon debility; and 
in this state of the body, the application of 
physical causes, such as cold applied to it, 
in a debilitated state, heat, contagion, pu- 
trid effluvia, and other powers, operating 
upon similar principles, will more effec- 
tually produce diseases of this nature; and 
the effect of these powers will be the more 
compleat, if to these are added excess of 
every kind, immoderate indulgence in the 
passions, fatigues of the mind, together 
with the afflictions and pains which are felt 
in every condition of mortality, from the 
monarch to the beggar, and which harrow 
up, and constantly prey upon our minds. 

|P_6
A Monarch is perhaps the most ex- 
posed to these causes. For when we con- 
sider him in the capacity of the first ma- 
gistrate in the land, it is natural to sup- 
pose that he must be burdened with cares 
and apprehensions, and liable to extreme 
fatigues, both of body and mind, which 
are to be always considered as the forbod- 
ing vouchers of a bad state of health. 

"If nature, says Rousseau, had decreed 
that we should be sound in body and 
mind, I will venture to assert, that a 
state of reflection is a state contrary to 
nature; and that a man of meditation is 
a depraved animal. Our misfortunes 
originate in ourselves, and that we should 
have avoided almost all of them, if we had 
followed the simple, uniform, retired 
manner prescribed to us by nature [/10./]. "

|P_7
These observations, of this profound 
observer of nature, apply with much force 
and propriety to the subject I am about to 
treat upon. For, as I have observed before, 
we have, from the most exalted of situa- 
tions, to the most humble of human con- 
ditions, our cares and our calamities to 
sustain. Yet it is natural to suppose, 
that the individual who approaches the 
most to the path prescribed to us by na- 
ture, experiences the feelings of tran- 
quillity and pleasure, in a more elevated 
capacity, than the personage who, from 
his situation, is constantly immured within 
the walls of study and reflexion; which is 
in a continual progression to debilitate the 
body, and to weaken the soul [/11./]. Hence 
arise nervous complaints of all sorts; such 
as the hypochondriasis, epilepsy, palsy, 
apoplexy, gout, and other diseases of this 
nature. 

|P_8
I have often been astonished to hear, 
that his Majesty could sustain, (without 
being precipitated long before this time 
into a state of disease,) the weighty, and im- 
portant business, which, like a millstone, 
must have hung heavy upon his mind, at 
the same time that it was reported, that 
he eat chiefly of vegetable food, and drank 
nothing but wine and water. To carry on 
a train of thought with vigour and effect, 
or to transact business of consequence, 
which is often very disagreeable to the 
mind, requires the adventitious aid of sti- 
mulating food, and cordial liquors, or the 
diseases I have taken notice of above will 
eventually take place. And physicians, as 
well as their patients, will be woefully 
deceived, if they suppose that either the 
Cheltenham waters, or the Bath waters, 
or even those of Spa, will operate wonders, 
|P_9
when the enemy, I mean disease, has 
stormed the citadel. 

Diseases, in the commencement of 
their attacks upon the constitution, are but 
faint resemblances of what are to happen. 
But they enliven our sensibilities, and our 
apprehensions, in proportion to their pro- 
gress; and our memories are at this time 
eternally presenting to us scenes in which 
we have acted a part. Hence philosophers, 
as well as moralists, are constantly declaim- 
ing against those gloomy ideas which hurt 
their solitary hours, and damp their most 
aspiring thoughts, by exhibiting things in 
the most odious colours imaginable. 

The cares and anxieties of private indi- 
viduals, as well as of those who are placed 
in more elevated capacities, insensibly bring 
on diseases, and those of a peculiar nature. 
|P_10
And there are sometimes snares, which even 
wisdom and prudence will not prevent our 
falling into. Although a warrior is often 
liable to them, a statesman is infinitely 
more so, which the history of mankind 
completely proves. Domestic anxieties, 
popular tumults, and national disasters, 
must constantly aggravate his feelings; and 
these marks of sensibility will, sooner or 
later, produce nervous diseases. The con- 
dition of statesmen in general is by no means 
applicable to the situation of the first ma- 
gistrate of his dominions, who has the per- 
petual call of his people to the exercise of 
every thing that is wise, just, and benevo- 
lent. And when wisdom, virtue, benevo- 
lence, and prudence, are disappointed in 
their intentions, maladies of a most forbid- 
ding aspect too often take place. Therefore 
the only consolation we can enjoy when we 
are afflicted with disease, is to submit with 
|P_11
patience and philosophy to the fate of 
men, and to the decrees of fate. Nay, if 
a straight waistcoat is advised by a grave 
physician, as a necessary appendage to our 
misery, we must even submit to this most 
infernal, and brutal usage. And this act 
of brutality, I am both free, and bold 
enough to acknowledge, is the consequence 
of employing of those, who are profoundly 
ignorant of the principles, and philosophy 
of the healing art. I have said before, 
that what is commonly termed madness, 
is brought on by the improper treatment 
of fevers: for this disease is no more here- 
ditary than the Gout, or the scrofula, 
which I have shewn, in my treatise upon 
the Gout, to be a disease depending upon 
the common causes of a relaxed habit. But 
I need not appeal to a greater authority, than 
my late learned preceptor, and worthy friend, 
Dr. Brown, who has had the honour to 
|P_12
explain, with the forcible language of 
truth, the nature of this disease, as well 
as almost every other incident to man. 

This idea leads me to a digression which 
I did not intend to make. But as I con- 
ceive it to be of some importance to man- 
kind, I intend to offer my opinions, at 
some length, upon the subject, as they 
may be of utility to mankind. I shall 
therefore consider the subject, both as a 
philosopher, as well as a physician; and I 
hope that a discerning public will not im- 
pute blame to an intention, which has 
the benefit of my fellow creatures before 
me. 

When I visited the Bissetre at Paris, in 
the year 1785, I could not forbear exhi- 
biting my sensibilities, and my feelings, at 
seeing such a number of unfortunate per- 
|P_13
sons chained down to their solitary abodes, 
without any other cause, from what I could 
learn, than the peculiarity of their conduct, 
or excentricity of their behaviour. In the 
course of my walk, and observations, I came 
to the cell of an Englishman, who had been a 
captain of a trading vessel from Dover, and 
who had been captured by a French priva- 
teer in the war before last [/12./]. I had two 
English ladies, a French lady, and a French 
gentleman in my company; and as soon as 
he found that there were English in com- 
pany, he spoke his mind very freely to us, 
and told us his story with the most perfect 
distinctness. His mind was perfectly col- 
lected, and he was much disposed to ex- 
press the fervency of it during the time we 
were in conversation with him; but the 
police of the place rendered it necessary that 
|P_14
we should saunter on to another abode of 
misery, and quit the mansion of this son 
of misfortune. The pleasures of commu- 
nicating his sorrowful tale to his country- 
women and myself being thus abruptly in- 
terrupted, must unquestionably have af- 
fected the feelings of the despairing man; 
and we could hear him, upon our depar- 
ture, break out into all the wild language 
of fury and despair. 

This, as well as many other cases which 
I could place before my reader, during my 
stay at this place, is a proof that moral causes 
have as great, if not a greater influence, 
in creating and perpetuating of nervous 
diseases of all kinds, than physical causes; 
and of that disease, called mania, in parti- 
cular. 

This leads me, in a natural direction, 
to consider the character and important 
|P_15
trust generally reposed by their patients, 
and the friends and relations of their pa- 
tients, in practitioners of physic. I have 
endeavoured to shew, in my Inquiry into 
the State of Medicine, that the education 
of physicians in general has a tendency to 
lead them to engage in disputes of words, 
while they imagine that they are handling 
controversies of the deepest importance and 
concern. It was in order to avoid alter- 
cations so frivolous and endless, that the 
penetrating and learned Dr. John Brown 
endeavoured to state, with the utmost cau- 
tion and simplicity, the great desiderata of 
 medicine, and to frame a plan of his own, 
for the removal of all the obstacles to the 
improvement of this noble art. This il- 
lustrious man saw, almost intuitively, the 
cobwebs which hung in suspence the fate 
of mankind: and if he had not united 
philosophy, and profound learning, to- 
|P_16
gether with much experience, the healing 
art might languish in its present deplorable 
condition for ages to come. 

"Ab hujus operis scriptore viginti am- 
plius anni discende, docendo, nullas me- 
dicinæ partes, non diligenter scrutando, 
consumpti. Quoram annorum quinque 
primi, aliunde accipiendo, accepta cog- 
noscendo, credendo, quasi pretiosam pos- 
sessionem occupando; proximum lus- 
trum, singula clarius explanando, sub- 
tilius excolendo, poliendo; tertium du- 
bitando, quia nihil ad mentem proces- 
serat, algendo, cum multis claris viris, 
cum ipso vulgo, pro incerta penitus et 
incomprehensibili salutiferam artem de- 
plorando; sine fructu, sine dulcissima 
rerum menti, luce veri, præteriere, tan- 
taque caduce et brevis ævi mortalis pars, 
tam opima, periit. Solo quarto lustro, 
|P_17
veluti viatori, ignota regione, perditis 
viæ vestigiis, in umbra noctis erranti, per o 
bscura quædam, quasi prima diurna, lux 
demum adfulsit." 

Brun. Med. Elem.
To return, however, to my subject. 
Diseases and death are the uniform fate of 
mortals. The infirmities of life, and the 
pains of disease, will naturally obtrude 
themselves upon those in exalted situations, 
as well as upon the most humble of beings; 
and in this condition of things it is, that re- 
flection takes place. In the gay and plea- 
sing moments of festivity and health, the 
fleeting moments of mirth and dissipation 
eraze all thoughts from our minds which 
are disagreeable to us [/13./]; and hence amuse- 
ments of all sorts are sought after by the 
more wealthy, to stifle those sentiments of 
|P_18
disappointment, mortification, and chagrin, 
which must, in a greater or lesser degree, 
influence all descriptions of individuals; 
but when the cruel hand of disease renders 
man a solitary animal, it is then that he 
begins to think of the past. 

There are no diseases which assume a 
greater variety of appearances than Agues, 
Fevers, and the Gout. When the gout flies 
to the head, it renders the feelings of the 
patient exquisitely painful. When the ague 
visits the head, the feelings are precisely 
the same. Nay, in what physicians call 
nervous fevers, there is the same intermission 
of disagreeable symptoms which prevails in 
the gout as well as in intermittent fevers. 
The patient is utterly at a loss to explain 
certain symptoms which take place in in- 
termittents, such as the severe and dreadful 
feelings which rack his head, and put him 
|P_19
in momentary expectation of death. The 
same is precisely the case in the gout. For 
the same appearances of the body, such as 
extreme languor, melancholy apprehen- 
sions, a state of despair, more or less, tre- 
mors, a susceptibility of what is commonly 
called catching cold, a propensity to think 
in a disagreeable train of thought, and se- 
veral other symptoms of the same nature, 
are observable in this disease also. Putrid, 
or what are termed nervous fevers, discover 
a great resemblance in their progress and ter- 
mination to these foregoing diseases, and are 
also to be relieved by a similar treatment. 

But the numerous hypothesis of physi- 
cians concerning these three distinct modi- 
fications of diseases, form insurmountable 
barriers to their being treated upon similar 
principles; and hence the diffusion of er- 
ror, and unaccountable torpor, which pre- 
|P_20
so universally among practitioners of 
physic, in their treatment of them. 

There is no end to the variety of books 
and dissertations upon medical subjects 
written by physicians. But the influence 
of the passions has been, in almost all these 
verbal disputes and dissertations, too un- 
heededly passed over. "An evil, con- 
ceived as barely possible, sometimes pro- 
duces fear; especially if the evil be very 
great. A man cannot think on excessive 
pain and torture without trembling, if 
he runs the least risque of suffering 
them. The smallness of the probability 
is compensated by the greatness of the 
evil [/14./]. "

I have often experienced the truth of 
this observation in my own person. 

|P_21
The regulation of the passions is, there- 
fore, in all nervous diseases, a principal desi- 
deratum: and the physician who is not phi- 
losopher enough to know how and when 
to apply with success his penetration in the 
regulation of the passions, will very seldom 
relieve a nervous disease, or a disordered 
state of the intellect. What is the reason 
that there are so many receptacles for what 
the ignorant world call mad people? I will 
answer very frankly, it is because so much 
ignorance and want of true philosophy 
prevail among the generality of physicians. 
It is an abominable disgrace to Britain, to 
behold such a number of public, as well as 
private mad-houses, as there are in this 
island. When an unfortunate man or wo- 
man have been mismanaged in a dreadful 
and alarming disease, it is proposed by 
some ignorant or interested dæmon or other, 
to send the miserable object of pity and 
|P_22
compassion to some place of security, where 
he has nothing to console him but cold, 
hunger, and ill usage. It is impossible to 
speak too much at large concerning the 
diseases brought upon mankind by the all- 
powerful operation of the passion of fear, 
in its different modifications. Both Mr. 
Hume, and Rousseau, speak of this passion, 
as to its causes and effects; and they seem 
to be in some measure right, so far as it 
produces diseases of the nervous kind, and 
what are vulgarly called maniacal diseases 
among the rest. 

"A dibilitated  body", says Rous- 
seau, weakens the soul. On this is 
founded the empire of medicine; an art 
more pernicious to man than all the ills 
it pretends to cure. For my own part, 
I know not of what disorders physicians 
cure us; but I know this, that they give 
|P_23
some which are very fatal, such as cow- 
ardice, pusillanimity, and the fear of 
death. If they cure our body, they kill 
courage. What is the importance of en- 
abling carcasses to walk? It is man that 
we want, and we never see any come 
from under their hands [/15./]." 

This ingenious philosopher was in a 
great measure right in his observations. For 
there is not a doubt, but that the method 
adopted by physicians in former ages, as 
well as in those of our own times, is de- 
structive of that principle which upholds 
us in afflictions, as well as in disease, and 
that is courage. I do not at all wonder that 
dramatic writers, such as Moliere, and other 
authors of sagacity and penetration, were 
forward in decyphering the hypocrisy and 
artifice which predominate so much among 
|P_24
some practitioners of medicine. It is quite 
enough to destroy a man's courage, in a 
state of disease, to see two, three, or more 
physicians, dressed in black, with grave 
countenances, and every affected art which 
formality itself can invent [/16./].—To depressed 
spirits and afflicted minds, such symbols 
of compassion and relief hold out no allure- 
ments to please and to gratify a distempered 
mind, which requires every solacement 
which virtuous sensibility is ever ready to 
communicate to the unfortunate. The 
Scriptures say, "Blessed is the peace- 
maker; " but how much more blessed and 
happy must that man be, who, by his pro- 
found knowledge in his profession, aided 
by that of deep philosophy, and a know- 
ledge of the passions, knows how to curb 
them, and when to raise them! he must 
surely afford the greatest of comforts to the 
distracted mind, and dibilitated body. 

|P_25
When I left the university, I flattered 
myself with the belief, that all diseases were 
to be cured by medicine and diet. And I 
have often expressed my surprise, that my 
attempts in some instances were ineffectual. 
But when the patient was dead, some un- 
foreseen circumstance then made its appear- 
ance, which sufficiently convinced me, that 
corroding cares had long preyed upon the 
mind, and that the heart had bled with re- 
peated sorrows; which has often since made 
me think, that physic and physicians are 
but imperfect instruments to restore to vi- 
gour, constitutions worn out with cares and 
anxiety. 

A poor man, when reduced in intellec- 
tual and bodily vigour by ill usage, and the 
sophistry and empiricism which prevail in 
medicine, is sent for the remainder of his 
days to Bedlam, or some other mansion of 
|P_26
misery. The rich man is confined to 
his own chambers, without one gleam 
of hope, either to invigorate his body, or 
comfort his mind. He is deprived of the 
society of those he loves and respects. The 
amusements which he had been accustomed 
to are never to refreshen his wasted spirits, 
or his decayed body; and in this solitary 
and dreadful condition is he to expiate, if 
he has any, all his errors and his sins. I 
would rather, if I had my choice, be car- 
ried about the country, as Bajazet the Em- 
peror of the Ottomans was, a spectacle for 
fools, and worse than fools, to look at, than 
be a prisoner in the predicament I have 
mentioned. 

Were I possessed of all the eloquence of 
Demosthenes, Cicero, and Tully, I fear I 
should be unequal to utter my sentiments 
at full length upon this important topic; 
|P_27
because I am well aware, that all diseases, 
where the vigour of the mind is affected, are 
the result of the passion of fear, which is a 
most debilitating passion, and is the prin- 
cipal cause of almost all nervous diseases. 
There is not a doubt but that it frequently 
produces convulsive, as well as spasmodic 
diseases; and I have been a witness to its 
bringing on fits of the gout repeatedly. I 
have not a doubt in my own mind but that 
it brings on the hydrophobia, and melan- 
cholic diseases, and what physicians term 
mania, or madness. And I am well con- 
vinced, that physic, as it is generally prac- 
tised, is the most suitable of all professions 
to produce this nervous disease. If a 
person, in a debilitated state of the body, is 
bled, blistered, vomited, and purged, he 
will, to a certainty, experience some severe 
nervous disease. But if these dibilitating 
powers are added to the disease, it is natural 
|P_28
to suppose, that death will be the conse- 
quence, unless what physicians call insa- 
nity takes place. "But even impossible
evils, says Mr. Hume, cause fear; 
as when we tremble on the brink of 
a precipice, though we know ourselves 
to be in a state of perfect security, 
and have it in our choice whether we 
will advance a step farther. The im- 
mediate presence of the evil influences 
the imagination, and produces a species 
of belief; but being opposed by the re- 
flection on our security, the belief is im- 
mediately retracted, and causes the same 
kind of passion as when, from a contra- 
riety of chances, contrary passions are 
produced [/17./]. " 

The passions produce infinitely greater 
effects upon the mind when the body is 
|P_29
in a debilitated state, than when it enjoys 
a healthy and vigorous state, whether this 
condition of the body arises from a too 
spare diet, or from a too voluptuous one. 
The imagination is infinitely more lively 
with apprehension in relaxed habits, than 
in vigorous constitutions. And hence ari- 
ses the great necessity of caution, presence 
of mind, and minute circumspection in 
those who are commissioned to attend the 
sick. For an error at this time is often ir- 
retrievable, but more especially when gen- 
tlemen of the faculty attend patients in ex- 
alted situations. Their empiricism, instead 
of assuming the bold and decided practice 
of Van Helmont, or Paracelsus, now puts 
on an air of timidity, for fear of what are 
termed the consequences.

To contribute, by want of foresight, or 
a profound and discriminating knowledge 
|P_30
of diseases, to the death of any department 
of society, is generally a prelude to their 
want of business as physicians; and there- 
fore it is natural to presume, that they 
will exercise more than common caution, 
and indulge in more than usual timi- 
dity, when they are to prescribe for their 
Sovereign. As fevers are the result of de- 
bilitating powers, and consist of debility 
over every part of the body, but more es- 
pecially in the head, it is to be presumed, 
that the King's physicians abstained from 
bleeding, blistering, &c. in their late treat- 
ment of him. 

An unusual fatality is generally the lot 
of kings, when they are subjected, by either 
accident or disease, to the fate prescribed 
by nature for man. In his healthy and 
vigorous state, both of body and mind, he 
is, as it were, elevated by the excessive obei- 
|P_31
sance of his courtiers, to a rank infinitely 
superior to the rest of mankind.—But 
observe the reverse! When all-prying 
disease commits its havock upon his body, 
and his mind, then he is reduced to a level 
with the rest of mankind, if not to a greater 
state of mortification, and even humilia- 
tion. That nature, in a great measure, 
points to relief, is a rule of infinite impor- 
tance in the healing art, but never attended 
to as it ought, by those who have the 
management of the sick. 

To regulate the mind in all diseases, but 
more especially in all nervous complaints, 
is an object of fundamental importance [/18./]. 

|P_32
take from a man the pleasures that he 
has been accustomed to, you hurt his peace 
of mind, and destroy for ever his sweet-re- 
pose. Deprive him of his usual comforts, 
and you make him a miserable and melan- 
choly being. If a man is fond of the plea- 
sures of a country life, such as farming, 
gardening, the sports of the field, and 
amusements of this nature, which are con- 
ducive to his propensities as a moral agent, 
you deprive him of the principal comforts 
|P_33
which this world is capable of affording 
him. If he is fond of the subject of moral 
philosophy, natural philosophy, or the sub- 
ject of mechanical knowledge, it naturally 
implies, that a deprivation of these plea- 
sures, which are the accompanyments of 
his solitary hours, are equivalent to the de- 
privation of his happiness. And without 
this celestial enjoyment, life, I will venture 
to say, is not worth enjoying. 

Philosophers have endeavoured to ex- 
plain the causes of suicide, but their at- 
tempts have been ineffectual; because no 
remedy has hitherto been applied to the 
disease. Like the laws of the Romans, 
which were, before the reign of the Empe- 
ror Justinian, an endless subject of munici- 
pal ordinances, so also have been the max- 
ims and speculations of men, to put a stop 
to this unfortunate failure of courage in 
|P_34
man. It would be an endless subject to 
multiply examples of the cruelties exercised 
upon men in one form or the other. Mora- 
lists and philosophers may preach to eter- 
nity upon this subject, and never reach at 
the cause. They are as widely at variance 
with the origin of this unfortunate pro- 
pensity, as the greatest number of physici- 
ans are in the proper treatment of nervous 
diseases. Even the elegant admonitions of 
Rousseau make me smile when he pretends 
to speak upon the subject, and are to be 
considered as neither more nor less than 
Job's comforters. 

Every good and benevolent man is of 
use to society during the period of his ex- 
istence: but deprive this virtuous charac- 
ter, by human ordinances, of that pre-emi- 
nence which his goodness, his charitable 
inclinations, and his universal sentiments 
|P_35
of benevolence prompt him to exercise; 
nay, go a step further, say that he is in- 
sane, and then you complete, in some mea- 
sure, the catastrophe [/19./]

|P_36
In order to carry folly and ignorance 
still further, deny the same individual the 
pleasures of seeing and conversing with 
those that are dear to him; if he is fond of 
music, deprive him of that; if he is desir- 
ous of seeing and of conversing with any 
person more than another, be sure that he is 
deprived of this consolation; if his family, 
which are dear to him, and most amiable 
in his eyes, are requested to afford him 
comfort, they are by the same authority de- 
nied access; if the same individual should 
long for wine, and other cordials, to raise 
|P_37
his drooping spirits, this, forsooth, is sup- 
posed to be pernicious; and all this for no 
other reason, but from the mere ipse dixit
of a set of men, who presume to hang in 
suspence the fate of men, as well as the fate 
of kingdoms. This complication of evils 
is sufficient to destroy the mind, as well 
as the body, of any human being. The 
body may be cured by medicine and diet, 
but a distempered mind requires some other 
consolations besides those which are derived 
from an apothecary's shop. Boluses, and 
pills, and draughts, &c. will heal the wound 
which want of discernment and skill has 
opened;—it requires some additional as- 
sistance to cure severe nervous diseases. 

The examination of Dr. Adington be- 
fore the Privy Council, concerning the 
state of our most worthy and amiable mo- 
narch's health, is now before the public, 
|P_38
and I shall not therefore hesitate to speak 
my sentiments upon the occasion. As I 
have not a doubt but that his Majesty has 
been treated injudiciously, from the begin- 
ning of his complaint to the present time; 
and it will be a duty incumbent upon his 
physicians to state at full length the condi- 
tion they found him in when they were 
consulted first of all, and to publish a jour- 
nal of their proceedings. It is full time 
that the whole of this dismal story should 
be held out to public notice. The public 
have a right to be acquainted with the 
whole mystery of their proceedings. Their 
reputations as physicians ought either to 
stand or fall by their method of treating 
the King in his late and present state of 
health. It is to be presumed that they 
can write, and defend, by their learning 
and ingenuity, their practice. 

|P_39
Dr. Adington, it appears, makes a 
distinction in what the vulgar call insanity. 
He confidently asserts, that it is an heredi- 
tary disease. I beg leave to enter the list 
as an advocate for the contrary doctrine. 
And I contend, that this disease is no more 
hereditary than a common fever, or the 
small-pox, but that it is brought on by 
the common causes of all other diseases. 
In my Inquiry into the State of Medicine, 
I have endeavoured to shew, that physici- 
ans are too often the unthinking copyists of 
each other. No man is allowed to think 
for himself; and if he does, he is hooted at 
as a common disturber. Therefore, what- 
ever Dr. Boerhaave, or Dr. Cullen say, is a 
law with their disciples. 

"As man", says the immortal Lord 
Bacon, "is but the servant and interpre- 
ter of nature, he can work and under- 
|P_40
stand no further than he shall, either in 
action or contemplation, observe of the 
proceedings of nature, to whose laws he 
remains subject. 

As truth is but one simple thing, so 
likewise is the interpretation of nature. 
But the senses are fallacious, the mind 
unstable, and the cause pressing, yet the 
business of interpretation is rather un- 
common than difficult.
Nov. Organ. 
These aphorisms of this illustrious phi- 
losopher apply to my subject. For I am 
ready to prove, to the satisfaction of man- 
kind, that the disease under which our 
most excellent Sovereign labours, is, from 
all accounts upon record, nothing else than 
a common nervovs fever. At the same time, 
I am forward enough to assert, and my as- 
sertion shall not be destitute of proof, if 
|P_41
called upon, that it is more uncommon in 
its appearance than difficult to cure. And 
I hesitate not to say, that I would, at the 
risque of my life, and every thing that is 
dear and valuable to man, undertake to re- 
store him soon to the full exercise of every 
bodily and mental enjoyment, upon a plan 
of diet alone, with proper exercise, together 
with the management of the passions of 
the mind. And there is nothing more easy 
than to uphold his Majesty in a state of 
good health, when once it is established. 

He who has not, in the first place, and 
above every thing else, thoroughly ex- 
amined the motions of the human mind, 
and with the utmost accuracy noted, and 
made a kind of map of the paths of sci- 
ence, and the seats of error therein, will 
find all things under a mask, or, as it 
|P_42
were, inchanted; and unless he breaks 
the charm, can never interpret it. 
Nov. Organ.
It is impossible that a private individual 
like myself can alter, remove, improve, or 
redress the prejudices, opinions, and errors 
of men, who have the sanction of mankind 
to tread in the paths of delusion and error, 
and have the inveterate and general preju- 
dices of ages to uphold them in their ca- 
reer of desolation. It may be said of them 
as it was said of Cæsar, "Cæsar gladium 
cito condidit, nunquam posuit. " Ci- 
cero also, when he speaks of this great 
man, says, "Cæsar, si ab eo quæreretur, 
quid egissit in toga, leges respondisset 
multas et præclaras tulisse. "

When a practice of physic destructive 
to our natures is pointed out by a man 
|P_43
of discernment and science, it is natural to 
presume, that when the system of a popu- 
lar assailant of these pernicious doctrines 
becomes general, that the opponents of a 
rational system of medical knowledge will, 
like Cæsar, soon sheath their swords, but 
never lay them aside. Death, one would sup- 
pose they consider, as some moralists do, is 
a cure for all the evils we bring upon our- 
selves; and that nature is tired of suffering 
us to be for ever miserable. 

Fashion, it must be granted, flourishes 
too much in human affairs; and fashion 
prevails to an extreme in the healing art. 
If a duke, a lord, or any man of fashion em- 
ploys a physician, his tradesmen must ape 
their manners, and do the same. If a phy- 
sician, let his ignorance of his profession 
be ever so great, can afford to keep up the 
formality of an equipage, and suitable de- 
|P_44
corations, he is sought after, and feed, 
while men of the greatest abilities and 
learning are suffered to walk the streets un- 
heededly. And if a title is conferred upon 
them, they arrive at the summit of the hill, 
from whence they can survey the folly and 
vanity of mankind. They are then in a 
too elevated situation to be opposed or 
questioned by itinerant physicians. They 
arrive at the ne plus ultra, and must be 
obeyed; and can, with the language of a 
dictator, say, like Cæsar, "Leges respon- 
desset, multas et præclaras tulesse. "

We need not wonder that diseases as- 
sume a variety of appearances in different 
persons, no more than we wonder at seeing 
different conformations of the body and 
the face in men and women. We might 
as well wonder, that in habits of severe ex- 
ercise, that the sweat appears first of all 
|P_45
on the forehead. If two young men, who 
live precisely alike, either in abstinence, or 
in hard drinking, or in debauchery of all 
kinds, entail upon themselves diseases, one 
would suppose that their respective com- 
plaints might resemble, in appearance, 
each other; but it is a hundred to one if 
they do; for the more athletic may expe- 
rience severe nervous feelings, while the 
more feeble is hurried off in a putrid fever. 
The same is the case with the fair sex; and 
the parallel holds good. The one is pre- 
cipitated into convulsions, when the other 
is labouring under a disease diametrically 
opposite in appearance. Appearances of 
diseases are nothing, the causes of diseases 
are the only requisites in the hands of a 
skilful and discerning physician; and when 
the causes are before him, if he unites phi- 
losophy with experience, the cure is near 
at hand in all human diseases. 

|P_46
The method of restoring the King to his 
accustomed mental and bodily vigour, is, in 
my humble opinion, obvious. He ought 
to be indulged in every rational propensity 
which is agreeable to his mind. His illus- 
trious consort and family ought to have ac- 
cess to him at all times. He should never 
be contradicted, nor thwarted in any thing 
that he can request, either in food or drink, 
unless he calls for vegetable food, and what 
are called diluting liquors. He should now 
indulge in animal food, and a proper quan- 
tity of wine. Music, provided it is not 
too loud, will be of great service in the 
re-establishment of his health. He should 
refrain from all kind of study and busi- 
ness, unless it is of an agreeable nature. 
He should avoid going out into the air, 
until the complaint leaves him entirely, 
otherwise the smallest chilliness in the air 
|P_47
will convey it into the head. [/20./] His body 
ought therefore to be kept very warm 
with flannel cloaths. Soups are very pro- 
per. The soups he takes ought to be made 
very rich of animal food, but much condi- 
|P_48
mentis not necessary in these preparations. 
His requests ought to be implicitly ob- 
served. "For the requests of kings", 
says Grotius, "have the same power as 
commands; and a denial, how just so- 
ever, shall be by them as ill digested as 
an injury.  It was therefore a most 
cruel act in those who attended his Majesty, 
when he saw through his window some of 
the princesses walk in the garden, to de- 
prive him of the pleasure and satisfaction 
of speaking to his beloved children. I have 
often, in this work, endeavoured to impress 
upon the minds of my readers, the extreme 
cruelty of depriving of mankind of their 
usual comforts and consolations in some 
|P_49
nervous complaints. And what pleasure 
in nature is there equal to the seeing, even 
in a state of health, much more in a state 
of disease, of those we are by nature, as 
well as by habits of mutual love and in- 
tercourse, to cherish and to admire. 

Another solacement to the mind of 
the King, is to be derived from reading to 
him, at proper seasons, those books which 
used to afford him pleasure when he was 
in a state of health. 

Dr. Willis appears, from his exami- 
nation before the House of Commons, to 
be a very sensible and discerning physician, 
and speaks of the causes which produce his 
Majesty's illness with perfect distinctness; 
such as weighty business, severe exercise, 
extreme abstemiousness, little rest, &c. 
These causes, of themselves, are sufficient 
|P_50
to produce a nervous fever, without the 
co-operation of other powers, tending to 
produce the same effect; such as bleeding, 
blistering, the debilitating operation of 
James's powders, and other medical pre- 
scriptions of the same nature. It appears, 
however, that the medicines given to his 
Majesty since Dr. Willis has been called in, 
have been attended with beneficial conse- 
quences: And I am naturally led to sup- 
pose, from the advantages which have 
hitherto resulted from them, that they 
must have partaken of opium, which, if 
administered with judgment and caution, 
and supported in their efficacy by invigo- 
rating food, and proper vinous cordials, 
are qualified to produce the most happy 
consequences. The very reverse is the 
case with this medicine when injudiciously 
made use of, which very often happens. 

|P_51
I beg leave to submit one more thought 
upon this subject. It appears that his 
Majesty had experienced considerable relief, 
during the progress of his illness, in using 
the warm bath; and I can venture to speak 
with certainty, that the effects of the warm 
bath are prodigiously increased, by being 
impregnated with the Peruvian bark, and 
aromatic herbs of all sorts. The only in- 
dication of cure is therefore to invigorate, 
by all possible means, the body, and to af- 
ford every consolation to the mind. This 
plan ought to be studied with much assi- 
duity by those who attend his Majesty. 
For whatever produces an encrease of bo- 
dily relaxation, will, to a certainty, bring 
on a renewal of his disease. 

FINIS. 
