
|P_
THE Science commonly understood 
by the Term Animal Magnetism,
and which has been so long kept out of 
sight (except to a Few only) is now laid 
open for the Information of every En- 
quirer; and I am fully persuaded, that 
any Person of an ordinary Capacity, by 
attending to the following Rules, will 
be capable of being as useful an Operator, 
as those who have obtained it at a much 
higher Price; only let him not be dis- 
couraged in his first Attempt; and by 
practice he will gain Confidence and Suc- 
cess. 

|P_
[}A 
PRACTICAL DISPLAY 
OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM CALLED 
Animal Magnetism. }]
IN order to make this useful Science as plain 
as possible, every thing that has not an im- 
mediate Connection with the practical part of it, 
is omitted, that the young Practitioner may not 
be confused with the Subject; and I am fully per- 
suaded, that, by attending to the Directions here 
|P_6
given, any one may attain to a sufficient knowledge 
of the Science to enable him to practise it for the 
Benefit of himself and others, as well as those who 
have obtained it at the Price of Twenty or 
Twenty-five Guineas. 

In order to treat a Patient with Success, the fol- 
lowing Qualifications are essentially Necessary. 

I. Abstraction. 
II. Affection. 
III. Intention. 
IV Volition. 
Abstraction. Be as much abstracted as possible, 
forget yourself and every thing around you, and 
take a kind of temporary Possession of the Object 
to be treated. 

|P_7
Affection. Let your Affection and Benevolence 
go forth towards the Object you are about to treat, 
let the whole energy of your Mind be fixed on 
the Patient's Relief, and almost certain Success 
will ensue. 

Intention. Keep up a constant Idea of the Com- 
plaint you wish to remove, let your Intention be 
to administer all the Assistance in your Power to- 
wards the Patient's Recovery; Compassion and In- 
tention will contribute much to the Success. 

Volition. The Human System being possessed of 
mental Faculties whose active Power is unknown 
'till it is demonstrated by practical Operations; 
exert all the Volition you are possessed off, with 
a Determination, if possible, to do good to the 
|P_8
Object you are treating, and you will often find 
a kind of contacting Sensation, effected by the In- 
corporation of Atmospheres and the powerful Prin- 
ciples of the Science acting upon each Body; and 
the greater the Exertion of those Principles the 
more effectual will the Treatment be. 

[}On the different Modes of Treating. }]
Several Modes have been practised, but I shall 
only mention Two, which will be quite sufficient 
for the Purpose, one by the Science itself, without 
the Use of the Hands, (for it is a mental Act, 
and the stronger the mental Powers the 
more efficaicous will the Treatment be.) Here 
abstract yourself, be quite placid and serene, keep 
up your Intention, and put forth all the Volition 
you are Master off: By this Means I have seen a 
Hand raised quite erect that lay passive on a Table, 
|P_9
without any Action whatever; but let me here 
observe, lest by failing in your first Attempt, you 
should be discouraged, a Person who will be faith- 
ful to you, that is to say, who will make no resist- 
ance, should be chosen, and the more delicate the 
Person the more easily will this Operation be per- 
formed. Whatever the Case you are about to 
treat may be, be not disheartened, nor weary, if 
your sanguine Expections should not, at first, be 
fully answered, but persevere, make repeated 
Trials, the more you practice the greater will be 
your Confidence, and the more successful your 
Treatment. 

The other Mode of treating I shall here men- 
is, by Use of the Hands with the Science, for 
there must be a concurrence with each other, the 
Hands will give a kind of energy to the Mind, 
and keep the Operator to his Work. The Effect 
of this will soon be perceived in the Patient, and 
|P_10
also by yourself, in the Patient the Effects may 
sometimes be different, but in general a warm Sen- 
sation will take place, at other times the Patient 
will feel cold; and the Operator will find a sort 
of pricking in the the Ends of all his Fingers.— 
So much for the Mode of Treating. 

The next Thing to be attended to is some of the 
Complaints the Human Body is subject to, and 
which the Operation of this Science is peculiarly 
adapted to remove; many Disorders arise from 
Obstructions and the want of proper Circulation 
of the Fluids: the Body is like a curious Machine, 
which if one Wheel be a little obstructed, it affects 
the Whole and when the Disorder is discovered the 
Remedy is the more easily applied; so when any 
Obstruction is perceived, apply the whole Energy 
of the mind to the part affected, and in this, as well 
as every other Magnetic Operation, separate as 
|P_11
much as possible, every Idea of corporal Action 
and think on mental Power only. 

Head-Ach. Whatever obstructs the free Circu- 
lation of the Blood through the Vessels of the 
Head, may occasion the Head-ach, which very 
frequently arises from a foul Stomach; in 
that case you must treat the Stomach only, by 
moving the Hand upwards and downwards, which 
will agitatate the Bile, and relieve the Patient; 
but if it arises from Obstructions, the Treatment 
will occasion an agreeable warmth, and assist Na- 
ture in overcoming the complaint; this will be 
found effectual in most Disorders of the Head. 
I have frequently cured the Head-ach, by pressing 
and drawing the Hand steadily over the Forehead, 
in less than half an hour. 

Inflammation of the eyes, may be cured by this 
Treatment, only observe (during the Operation 
|P_12
with the Hand) to exert your Intention, as much 
as possible, to draw out the Inflammation: By the 
same method you may treat Abscesses in order to 
bring them to a head, if you cannot disperse them; 
likewise you will find it effectual to extract Fire 
from burns of all kinds, in two or three times 
treating, and if not very much burnt, in one Treat- 
ment only. 

Strains. In treating Strains, which are often at- 
tended with worse consequences than broken 
Bones; fix your Mind intensely on the part affect- 
ed, and while you are engaged in the method of 
Treatment, as above, the Patient will find an 
agreeable glow and warmth pervade the part, 
which will help to restore the Vessels to their 
proper Tone. 

Deafness. The hearing may be hurt by violent 
Colds in the Head, by a Stroke upon the Ear, by 
|P_13
hard Wax, or other Substances, filling up the 
Cavity of the Ear, all which may be removed by 
perseverance in the Treatment. Place the Patient 
at a little distance, with the Ear inclining towards 
you: Let your mental Ideas enter the Ear, at 
the same time moving your Hands backwards and 
forwards, pointing towards the Ear, and carry your 
Ideas, as it were, through the Head; and by a con- 
tinuance of this Treatment, an agreeable warmth 
will be produced, and the Obstruction removed. 
I have known a Deafness occasioned by a stroke 
on the Ear, to have been totally removed in a 
quarter of an Hour; and Persons who had been 
Deaf for many Years, have been restored to their 
Hearing by repeated Treatments of this Kind; 
but great care must be taken not to catch Cold 
whilst the Cure is performing, lest it should render 
the Treatment ineffectual. 

We now advance to another part of the Sci- 
|P_14
ence, that of absent Treatment, and here it ap- 
pears in a more irrational and obscure point of 
view, to ignorant and prejudiced minds; [/1./] but why 
should this be thought incredible, since Expansion 
or Distance is allowed to be a relative Idea, which 
belongs only to the Body, and has nothing to do 
with the Soul; the Soul is possessed with inte- 
lectual Powers and Affections, such as Thought, 
Reflection, Sensation, Volition or Willing, and 
I can as easily fix my Mind upon St. Peter's at 
Rome as on St. Paul's in London. Distance be- 
longs to the Body, as observed above, but Thought 
cannot be confined, it can travel backward into 
the past, or forward into the future, it can aspire 
to things above as well as reflect on things beneath; 
when we want to recollect any thing we travel 
back into the past, we exercise a wish to recollect, 
|P_15
and often our wishes are effectual and the thing 
we want to recollect is brought to our Mind: 
Thoughts are in many cases, influencial, why may 
they not affect and remove Disorders from Per- 
sons at a distance, as well as those at hand?— In 
order to perform absent Treatment, retire; sit 
down for a few Minutes, be perfectly collected, 
and as much as possible abstracted; consider the 
Powers you are possessed off, and what you wish 
to perform to your absent Friend, form his Idea in 
your Mind, fix on it for some time, and descend 
slowly and gradually from the Head downwards, 
'till by the power of Sympathy you feel yourself, 
as it were, in contact with him and find a corres- 
pondent Pain which you must endeavor to remove: 
But if you know the Complaint your absent Friend 
labours under, and would relieve him, sit down, 
collect yourself, and then treat him, though absent, 
in the same Manner you would if you saw him be- 
fore you. 

|P_16
If upon reading these Lines the Science should 
appear a Chimera, the Reader is requested not to 
censure and condemn it 'till he has tried the Power 
of it for his own Satisfaction and Conviction, and 
if he finds it effectual in one Case, let him suspend 
his judgement 'till he has tried it in others, and I 
am persuaded he will not be disappointed. Let him 
make Trial of raising the Hand as directed in the 
Mode of Treatment, and he will have occular De- 
monstration of the Power of the Science. 

FINIS. 
