
|P_
[}THE 
PREFACE. }]
THOUGH Walton Water, is here held out, as pos- 
sessing the same Properties and Medicinal Powers as Chel- 
tenham Water, it is not done with the most distant View, 
to lessen the Reputation of that Water, and the Resort to 
Cheltenham. On the contrary, it is presumed, it will be 
a Satisfaction to Invalids to be assured of having within a 
small Distance, a Water of the same Kind, to which recourse 
may be had, when the Numbers are so great at Chelten- 
ham, as to be insufficiently supplied from the Well there. 

In this point of View, the Water near Tewkesbury
must be useful to Cheltenham in full Seasons, and, cannot 
injure it in any one, at its priority in use, and, the habit of 
Resort for Amusement, as well as Health, will give Chel- 
tenham the Preference. 

Tewkesbury, however, has equally a Right to the 
Benefit of its natural Riches, and to the Advantages which 
may accrue to it from the Vicinity of Walton Waters in 
particular. This Borough is situated on a fertile Plain, at 
the Conflux of the River Avon with the Severn. The 
Town is well built, and now well paved, and, Provisions 
of every Kind, particularly the finest Salmon, are in great 
|P_iv
plenty. It communicates by a very good Road, to fine rides 
towards Worcester, Upton, and Malvern, and is only 
nine Miles from Cheltenham.

In these rides, the various Views of a most Picturesque 
Country, charm the Eye, and make the salutary Exercise 
of riding delightful. Malvern, rising in benign, Majesty, 
diffuses all around a pure and temperate Air; a Water 
exceeding all others in elementary Purity; which every 
Year manifests its salubrity in curing Diseases which have 
bassied the Power of Medicine in other Situations. 

Tewkesbury, and its Environs, besides the striking 
beauties of the Country, present to the Observation of the 
curious; A Field of Battle where Victory fixed the Crown 
on the Head of Edward IV. A Church, one of the finest 
Gothick Structures in England; in which lie the Re- 
mains of Edward Prince of Wales, Son of Henry VI. 
cruelly murdered in cold Blood, with the Duke of Somerset
and many other Noblemen and Gentlemen who shared his 
Fate after that decisive Battle. 

—Sacros Ausus recludere fontes. 
My Motto, is proper in more Senses than one; for taking 
advantage of the Epistolary Form; I have attempted to 
illustrate the Use of the Lymphatic Glands, acknowledged 
to be hitherto undiscovered, as well as to make known the 
Properties of a new Medicinal Water. 

|P_
SIR, 

AT length, I send you, an ac- 
count of the Experiments, made on the Medicinal 
Water near Tewkesbury, of which, so much has 
been said at Cheltenham, in the course of this Season 
and the last. 

I first heard of this Water in passing through 
Tewkesbury in 1786. It had been for some time re- 
sorted to, by Persons in the Neighbourhood, and, 
was reported to have effected Cures in the Diseases 
for which Cheltenham Water is sound to be so effica- 
cious, and, on account of which, Persons of every 
Rank, resort to that Place in such Numbers, as to 
exhaust sometimes the Spring on which they rest 
their hopes of recovery. 

This Well is situated near Walton, a Village 
about a mile from Tewkesbury, upon an Estate be- 
longing to Nicholas Smithsend, Esquire. The 
Ground about the Well is a deep Clay Soil, under 
which, at the depth of about seven or eight yards, 
runs a Stratum of blue slaty Stone; on piercing this 
Bed of Stone, plentiful Springs of Water arise, 
which are always more or less impregnated with Salt. 

|P_6
The Well, of which I write, is about twenty 
feet deep. 

The Water from the Pump, or soon after, hasa 
soft, almost Oleaginous taste, numerous Air Bubbles 
rise, and sparkle in the Glass; after it has been 
drank, it leaves the Chalybeate, and Saline tastes on 
the tongue, and when shook in the Bottle, the He- 
patic smell is very perceptible. 

Its resemblance in taste, and other appearances to 
the Cheltenham Water, strikes every one who makes 
the comparison. 

Its operation on the Body, also, is exactly the 
same, a Pint or more, acts as a gentle Laxative and 
Diuretic: And it occasions a slight giddiness in some 
persons, in others a sort of heavy pain in the head. 

These tests, though of themselves, sufficiently 
convincing, will be confirmed by the Experiments 
which I made on the Walton Water, in the Summer 
of 1786, and this Summer, in which I had the assist- 
ance of the worthy Surgeons and Apothecaries, at 
Tewkesbury. 1. When the Walton Water is mix- 
ed with Clear siltered Lime Water, it becomes im- 
mediately cloudy, and, a copious white scaly preci- 
pitation ensues. 

The same cloudy appearance arises in Lime Wa- 
ter, when the Air, separated by Heat from the Wal- 
ton Water, is conveyed by a Pipe and Bladder, con- 
|P_7
nected with the two Bottles, into the Bottle, con- 
taining the Lime Water, and shaken with it. 

If the Walton Water has been taken from the 
Well, twelve or more hours, the precipitation by 
Lime Water, does not take place immediately, in 
the manner it does in a Glass of Water from the 
Pump. 

White Arsenic, dissolves more readily in the 
Walton Water, than in common Water, and ren- 
ders the Hepatic smell thereof, stronger and more 
perceptible. 

2. When Walton Water, fresh from the Pump, 
is mixed with an Infusion of Green Tea, the mixture 
assumes a Purple Colour, and by standing, the Co- 
lour becomes deeper, 

3. Solution of Saccharum Saturni, mixed with 
fresh drawn Water, becomes brown, and is followed 
by a blackish precipitation. This is a test of the pre- 
sence of Hepatic Air, which also discovers itself in 
this Water, by its characteristic Sulphureous smell. 
This often is produced by putrifying Vegetables. 
Bishop Watson, observes, that Sulphureous Waters 
are produced in Morasses and Bogs, from rotten 
Wood; that Shale, a stone so called, of which there 
is a Stratum, extended all over the Country about 
Harrowgate, and from which the Sulphur Springs 
there arise, contains both Vitriolic Acid and Phlo- 
giston, the constituent parts of Sulphur; and some 
|P_8
pieces of Shale, when calcined properly, have been 
found to communicate the Sulphureous impregnation 
to Water, Ph. Trans. 1786. It is sufficient to ob- 
serve, that Walton Water emerges from a bed of 
stone, and, of a blue Sulphureous soft Pyrites, pro- 
bably similar to this, and that the Soil abounds with 
the remains of rotten Vegetables resolved into it, and 
that from one or both these sources, it derives the 
Hepatic Gas perceived in it. 

The blue Sulphureous Pyrites found in digging 
the Ground in the Field belonging to the Well-house 
near Walton, has exactly the same appearance and 
properties as that dug, to make a New Well, near 
Fauconberg-house, by order of his Majesty. 

4. After Walton Water has been drawn from 
the Pump ten or twelve hours; it no longer becomes 
purple or blackish, by the addition of astringents, 
(No. II.) and a precipitation with Lime Water, does 
not immediately ensue, (No. I.) 

5. Its Colour neither becomes Green nor Red, 
with Syrup of Violets. 

6. It does not effervesce with the Vitriolic or 
Nitrous Acids. 

7. It becomes milky by mixture, with the fixed 
Alkali, and more so with the Volatile Alkali pre- 
pared with Lime. 

8. Solution of Silver, makes it milky and a fla- 
ky precipitation subsides. 

|P_9
9. Two ingenious friends, and accurate observers, 
found the whole fixed contents of the Water left by 
evaporation, amounted to one ounce in a gallon. 

10 After various evaporations, I found it yield- 
ed exactly that quantity. 

When a Gallon of the Water is reduced by eva- 
poration to two ounces and under, a considerable 
quantity of an earthy powder remains in the vessel in 
which it was boiled. And when the liquid is set to 
cry stallise, Crystals, in shape and size, resembling 
the Vitriolated Magnesia are formed. They are hexa- 
gonal, and when dried in the Sun, are calcined into 
a white powder. The taste cool and bitter. 

Some cubical Crystals of marine salt, and a de- 
liquescent bitter lixivium remain. 

The powder, dropped by boiling in the vessel, 
consists of Magnesia, and an absorbent earth, which 
entirely dissolve in Vinegar, with considerable esser- 
vescence. 

The quantity of large Crystals amounted to six 
drachms or more, from a Gallon of Water, evapo- 
rated in 1786; but, by after experiments, I find this 
impregnation is not constantly in the same quantity, 
and proportion. 

11. Lastly, the Crystals of the Walton Water, 
and, the white powder into which these dried Cry- 
stals sall, when dissolved, the Solution is again per- 
fect, and clear in an exceedingly small quantity of 
Water. 

|P_10
Salt of Tartar, added to this Solution, becomes 
Milky, and a copious white sediment subsides, sound 
to be Magnesia. 

Lime Water added to the Solution, occasions a 
Milky whiteness, and a soft Alkaline precipitation, 
but it does not happen near so soon as that made by 
falt of Tarter. 

[}SOME FARTHER EXPERIMENTS 
On WALTON WATER, 
Made in November, 1787,
By JOHN JOHNSTONE, B. A.
Of MERTON COLLEGE, Oxford. }]
THE Water, on which the following Experi- 
ments were tried, had been drawn from the Spring 
several weeks before it was used. And though it was 
conveyed from Walton to Birmingham in Bottles 
well corked and covered with Wax, yet the appear- 
ances which result from the presence of the Volatile 
Ingredients are not to be expected in these Experi- 
ments. 

1. This Water did not immediately become Pur- 
ple with Tincture of Galls, but by standing it con- 
tracted a dusky greenish colour with a variegate 
Pellicle at the top. 

|P_11
2. Phlogisticated Alkali did not occasion any 
change of the colour in the Water. 

The fixed Air having escaped, the Iron was pre- 
cipitated, and of course could not exhibit those Ap- 
pearances which it did in the Experiments made by 
my Father at the Spring. 

3. Syrup of Violets made it of a light green Co- 
lour, Tincture of Turnsole became brown when 
mixed with it. Tincture of Brazil Wood gave it a 
blue cast. 

The Appearances produced by these three Precipi- 
tants were occasioned either by Magnesia or Alkali, 
disengaged by the escape of the fixed Air. 

4. Acid of Sugar discovered Lime, by precipita- 
ting it in the form of a white Powder. 

5. Salited Terra Ponderosa, by attracting the 
Vitriolic Acid, occasioned a white turbidness in this 
Water. 

6. Nitrated Silver shewed the presence of Ma- 
rine Acid; its attraction for it producing a white 
Cloud, which on standing, became of a black colour. 

7. An Alkali, very copiously precipitated a white 
Powder, which appeared to be Magnesia. 

By several Experiments, a quart of the Walton 
Water yielded, on Evaporation, 120 1/2  grains. 

I. The residue of a Quart of this Water, was first 
|P_12
mixed with Alcohol, which took up 6 1/2  grains of it. 
This, by its deliquescing in the air, was found to con- 
sist of Magnesia. 

II. Distilled Water dissolved 105 grains of it. 
As I could not crystallise the whole, I cannot tell 
the proportion of each Salt, but I had reason, both 
from what did crystallise, and from Experiment, to 
suppose, that Vitriolated Magnesia is the most abun- 
dant in this Water. A quantity of Alcohol, suffici- 
ent to precipitate the Bases of those Salts in which 
there was Vitriolic Acid, was mixed with a pint of 
Walton Water. A copious Precipitation ensued, 
which on examination proved to be Magnesia alone. 
For on adding Syrup of Violets to the Magnesia in 
distilled Water, no evidence of Alkali appeared 
more than what Magnesia would alone have given. 

To a quart of Walton Water was added a quantity 
of Vegetable Alkali sufficient to precipitate all the 
Magnesia. When the Precipitation was over, the 
whole was siltered, and the Water set to crystallise. 
The Crystals in general, were those of Vitriolated 
Tartar, and a few resembling those of Glauber's 
Salts appeared. A very small quantity remained un- 
crystallised, which perhaps, was common Salt. 

III. Distilled Vinegar was mixed with what 
the Water left, and took up 5 1/2  grains of it. On 
Examination this proved to be Lime. It had a re- 
markable pungent taste, did not deliquesce in the 
Air, and formed on the Addition of Vitriolic Acid, 
a kind of Gypsum. 

|P_13
IV. An Alkali diminished the remainder 1 1/2  grain. 
I could not exactly tell what the Alkali took up here, 
but it seemed to be a kind of Argillaccous Earth. 

V. The Alkali left nearly 1 1/2  grain of a black 
looking Earth. This was mixed with diluted Ma- 
rine Acid, which dissolved nearly the whole of it. Phlogisticated Alkali, dropped into the Solution, 
immediately produced a very bright blue Colour. 
I therefore concluded that the grain and very small 
quantity more which the Marine Acid had dissolved 
was Iron. The small quantity of Earth which did 
not dissolve in the Acid, as it resisted all the above 
mixtures, I concluded to be Siliceous Earth. 

There appears then to be in a Quart of Walton Water, 

   Grains, 
I.Of Ærated Magnesia, —6 1/2 
II.Of different Salts, but chiefly Epsom, 105 
III.Of Ærated Lime, — —5 1/2 
IV.OF Earth, perhaps Argillaceous —1 1/2 
V.OF Ærated Iron, with a little Siliceous Earth 1 1/2 

Cheltenham Water (of which I had a few Bot- 
tles) exhibited the same appearances with Precipi- 
tants, only in some instances they were more striking. 

A quart of Cheltenham Water yielded, on Eva- 
poration, 127 grains. I tried the Experiments with 
Alcohol and Vegetable Alkali, on Cheltenham, with 
the same Appearances as with Walton Water, only 
a large Crystal of Glauber's Salt appeared in the 
Vessel with the Alcohol. 

|P_14
[}EXPERIMENT 1. }]
SHEWS Walton Water abounds with fixed Air. 
Lime becomes quick, calcined or caustic, by the ex- 
pulsion of this Air by fire; and being attracted again 
from this Water, the Calcareous Matter before held 
in Solution, becomes mild and precipitates in form 
of a clear and white powder. The immediate pre- 
cipitation, which takes place by the mixture of Wal- 
ton Water with Lime Water, and still more clearly 
the Air forced from Walton Water agitated with 
Lime Water, is therefore a certain test of the pre- 
sence of fixed Air in Walton Water. 

2. By this experiment, Iron in a small quantity, 
appears to be one of the sugitive ingredients in the 
Walton Water. This, as well as some absorbent 
earth, is kept in a dissolved state by the fixed Air and 
the Sulphureous Gas contained in it: When the 
fixed Air flies off, which it does much sooner than 
the Hepatic Gas, the Iron precipitates, and the Wa- 
ter is no longer capable of becoming Purple by 
astringents. The action of heat carries off the He- 
patic Gas, which appears to hold the absorbent earths 
in Solution, which are left by evaporation; and to 
which the soft, almost oleaginous taste, with which 
this Water strikes the tongue, is probably owing. 

|P_15
3. The addition of Saccharum Saturni discovers 
the presence of the Hepatic Air, another fugitive 
principle contained in this Water, as well as that of 
Cheltenham: But it is much less fugitive than fixed 
Air, being often perceived, both in the Cheltenham 
and Walton Waters, after they have been bottled a 
considerable time. This Sulphureous or Hepatic 
Air, found in this and in other Waters, has been 
the occasion of much controversy among the Gentle- 
men who have analysed Waters: Mr. Kirwan, has, 
probably finally, settled the dispute, by shewing that 
Hepatic Air is no other, than actual Sulphur kept in 
Solution, in an acrial State, by union with the mat- 
ter of heat, Ph. Tr. 

4. It is evident, from this article, that the fixed 
Air only dissolves and keeps Iron suspended in the 
Water. Its disappearance so soon, shews its very 
volatile Nature, and, the necessity of resorting to 
these Springs, to have the benefit of a principle and 
ingredient, which gives penetrability, and action to 
the Saline contents of the Waters. 

5, 6. Shew the Salts contained in these Waters 
are neutral: And, that neither the acid nor the Alkali, 
of which they are compounded, prevail. 

7 — 11. DEMONSTRATE, that Vitriolated Magnesia, 
is the principal Salt contained in the Walton Water. 
The attraction of an alkaline Salt, and especially that 
of the caustic Alkali, with the Vitriolic Acid, is 
greater than that of the Magnesia, which is precipi- 
tated in these experiments. 

|P_16
8. The existence of Sea Salt, is manifested by 
this experiment, and by the cubic Crystals formed 
in the residuum. 

9, 10. From all our experiments, fixed Air dissol- 
ving a small quantity of Iron: Hepatic Air, united 
with an absorbent earth, appear to be the fugitive 
ingredients of the Walton Water. The fixed ingre- 
dients discovered by evaporation and crystallisation, 
appear to be a Vitriolated Magnesia, united with a 
little Vitriolated Mineral Alkali, in the quantity 
of six or seven drachms, in one Gallon of Water. 
Magnesia, Lime and absorbent earth, and a delique- 
scent bitter Lixivium, consisting of salited Magnesia 
and Lime, with a few grains of entire Sea Salt, alto- 
gether, about a drachm or two to a Gallon. 

That these also are the component Medicinal in- 
gredients in the Cheltenham Water, appears by the 
analysis, of the learned Dr. Fothergill, of Bath. 

This Gentleman, in his very valuable experimen- 
tal enquiry into the nature and qualities of Chelten- 
ham Water, p. 42. concludes, "from the preceed- 
ing experiments, a Gallon of the Water, wine mea- 
sure, appears to contain the subsequent principles, 
nearly in the following proportions: Native Glauber 
Salt, with a portion of Epsom Salt, one ounce; Sea 
Salt, five grains; Iron combined with fixed Air, 
five grains; Magnesia combined with fixed Air, 
twenty five grains; Calcareous earth, or Selenite, 
forty grains; fixed Air, combined with phlogistica- 
|P_17
ted Air, twenty-four ounce measures. To these may, 
perhaps, be added a small proportion of Hepatic Gas 
or Hepar Sulphuris converted into Vapour by the 
separation of its phlogiston." [/1./]

By this ingenious Work, it appears, and is suffi- 
ciently known to all who frequent Cheltenham, 
that the Iron is very soon precipitated from the Wa- 
ter, after it is drawn from the Pump; and, in a short 
time it cannot be made to assume a purple colour, 
by the addition of astringents. 

The Salts of the Walton and Cheltenham Waters, 
are both soluble in a very small quantity of Water, 
equal to their weight nearly: And their impression 
on the human senses, and, their action in the bowels, 
is the same. 

In so many points, the Cheltenham and Walton 
Mineral Waters, are entirely like each other; a pint 
or less of each opens the body; some find a small 
addition of the Walton, necessary to produce the 
same effect in the same degree; others find no dif- 
ference; the purgative Salt is somewhat less, about a 
drachm in a gallon, in my experiments; but the 
quantity of fixed Air, and Steel are at least equal. 
The Hepatic Air seems to prevail in the Walton 
Water, over the Cheltenham, which gives it a most 
pleasing almost Oleaginous softness, and makes it 
highly grateful in taste, and gentle in operation, and, 
|P_18
far more suitable in diseases of the kidneys, and uri- 
nary passages, than the Cheltenham Water itself. 

Without, therefore entering into a farther de- 
tail of Chymical research, I apprehend the similarity 
of the Walton, to the Cheltenham Water, to be suf- 
ficiently ascertained, to warrant its use and applica- 
tion in the diseases, for which Cheltenham Waters 
have been used with advantage. 

The analysis of Mineral Waters, undoubtedly is 
highly useful; but notwithstanding the perfection to 
which it is carried by discoveries in modern Chymis- 
try, I apprehend it gives a very imperfect idea of the 
real composition of Waters; in short, such an idea 
as diffection gives of an animated body, a view of its 
parts disjointed, and separate, very different from that 
union, on which symmetry and life depend. 

It is on this account, that the exhibition of the in- 
gredients found to compose mineral Waters, and the 
imitations of many of them, administred as Medi- 
cines, fall short of the Waters prepared by 
Nature, especially when drank at the sources. 

It is the same in other parts of the Materia Me- 
dica: An analysis, in some measure, assists in ac- 
counting for the operation of a Medicine, but seldom 
enables us to prepare, and compound to perfection, 
the natural productions we pretend to imitate. [/2./]

|P_19
The use, and advantage of Waters, is established 
by experience alone, as well as that of every article 
in the Materia Medica. The advantages found from 
the use of the Walton Well, in various eruptive di- 
seases, and in old sordid ulcers, as well as in many 
other diseases, has already been so considerable as to 
confirm the expectation grounded on their being 
similar to the Cheltenham Water. 

It will undoubtedly be found as much like Chel- 
tenham Water, as that Water is like itself at differ- 
ent seasons. Seasons occasion accidental differences 
of saturation in all Mineral Waters, the cause of 
which, is sometimes known, and sometimes un- 
known. Rainy seasons, while they make Springs 
more abundant, render the Mineral impregnation at 
the same time weaker. To this alteration, the Wal- 
ton Water must be sometimes liable, as it lies on a 
plain, part of which is frequently overflowed with 
Water. But, if by experience, this shall be sound 
to have any considerable influence, means will be 
used to remove the inconvenience. An inconveni- 
ence which is very seldom likely to happen in dry 
and warm seasons, in which, Waters of this class, 
are for the most part resorted to. 

After all, I am persuaded, that the dilution of 
Mineral Waters is very seldom any injury to the pa- 
tient. The virtues and powers of Mineral Water, 
depending principally on the quantity of Water, the 
medium, in which the Medicinal ingredients are 
|P_20
suspended; the vehicle which conveys them into 
the smallest vessels, and makes them capable of re- 
moving obstructions fixed in them, and in various 
glands; hence the same Medicinal ingredients, given 
in the usual forms, have but little efficacy in remo- 
ving such diseases. 

The healing powers of the Walton Well, and 
those of its Sister of Cheltenham, are owing to the 
mixture of a neutral compound of vitriolated Mag- 
nesia, commonly called Epsom. or Cathartic Salt; 
to vitriolated Mineral Alkali, or Glauber Salt, with 
a small portion of salited Mineral Alkali, Magnesia, 
and Lime, nearly to the quantity of a drachm, in a 
pint of Water; also to a considerable quantity of 
fixed Air, and Hepatic Gas, by the former of which 
Iron, and by the latter Magnesia, and absorbent 
Earth, are held in Solution. 

The whole is a composition, friendly to appetite 
and digestion; as well as soft, and pleasing to the 
taste. It is also a penetrating deobstruent, and, atte- 
nuating medicine, and in sensible operation, a quick 
and gentle Laxative and Diuretic; and when applied 
with discretion, it may be continued a long time 
without any dimunition of strength. 

It is obvious, this Water contains Saline ingre- 
dients, and, others possessing different attractive 
powers and assinities, which, though ballanced in 
the Water; yet, when mixed with animal fluids, 
and Salts in the course of digestion, Chylisication, 
|P_21
and in circulation with the blood, must be so chang- 
ed, and varied as to form new attractions, and com- 
binations in their course through the vessels, whence 
compounds possessing properties, different from what 
existed before, will be produced, and the system it- 
self will be changed. It is well known, that cold is 
generated by dissolving Salts; and, that while Saline 
Bodies, of different affinities, and attractive powers, 
are forming new compounds; such Salts in the pro- 
cess of mutual attraction, and incorporation, produce 
heat. In this manner, and from such causes, new 
stimuli, with other alterations, take place in the 
glands, and remoter vessels of our system, from the 
Salts, combined with other ingredients in Mineral 
Waters; and, it is by these means, as well as eva- 
cuation, they become beneficial, and are really valu- 
able alterative Medicines. 

The Walton Waters, being a compound, sui ge- 
veris, similar to Cheltenham, they both operate pri- 
marily, and principally on the intestines, as a gentle 
purgative, "Their mode of operation, (says Dr. 
Smith, p. 21, 22,) upon the intestines, producing 
an easy, sudden discharge, is explainable upon the 
principle of the tenuity, and uniform diffusion of 
the ingredients in the Water. For the Water, 
after having performed its strengthening, and ex- 
hilarating office upon the stomach, passes quickly 
into the intestines as sluids do, carrying along with 
it, more or less of all its ingredients, but particu- 
larly its great dilution, and consequent dispersion 
|P_22
all over the internal surface of the canal, vellicates 
the innumerable, little exhalent vessels, with 
which that cavity is crouded, into a plentiful secre- 
tion; and notwithstanding the stimulus may be but 
slight on any particular part, on account of the 
minuteness of the particles of the Salt; yet as they 
are universally diffused, and act upon the whole 
system of exhalents at once, a more eopious and 
expeditious evacuation is produced, than what is 
often attainable from a much larger quantity of any 
of the other more stimulating purgatives less atte- 
nuated; attended at the same time with these im- 
portant advantages; that as the stimulus is gentle, 
no griping pain is likely to be excited, and as it is 
superficial, the particles must soon be washed off 
in the general current, without leaving behind 
them any of those disagreeable feelings that usually 
hang in the rear of other Cathartics. "[/3./]

Corollary. Mineral Waters in general, derive 
their healing powers much less from the metals, 
earths and salts, often inconsiderable in quantity, 
which remain after evaporation, than, from the vo- 
latile principles, united with them, but diluted in a 
very great proportion of Water; and, they univer- 
sally owe the activity the whole possesses, to the 
incorporation of the volatile and sugitive principles, 
both with the Water, and, with the grosser ingre- 
dients, combined together most intimately. 

|P_23
The taste of the Walton Water, fresh from the 
Spring, as has been already observed, is at first soft, 
and afterwards agreeably Saline; the Sulphur and 
Iron, are also plainly tasted in it, in the quantity of 
a pint, and, often less, it occasions two or three lax 
stools, and, operates without the least sickness, gri- 
ping or any kind of inconvenience. 

The quantity of urine is also encreased: it sits easy 
on the stomach, and appetite is promoted. 

The volatile principles fly off, soon after the Wa- 
ter is removed from the Well; and, as these are so 
essential to its efficacy, and, render it agreeable to the 
taste and stomach, and carry the Saline, invigora- 
ting, and deobstruent contents of the Water into 
the vessels and glands; it is necessary to drink it 
from the Pump, or very soon afterwards. 

These Waters not only remove costiveness, but 
encrease appetite, and the powers of digestion, 
The chylification of digested aliment is more per- 
fectly elaborated, and, the errors of the first digesti- 
on prevented, and remedied in an effectual manner; 
whatever is injurious to health in the stomach and 
and intestines, acidity, and #ilious putrid matter are 
carried out of the body. Worms, and their nidus 
|P_24
are expelled. In this manner the seeds of disease 
will be prevented in the chyliferous vessels; and the 
Chyle itself being highly elaborated, and, withal, 
diluted with the Water, enters the lacteals, posses- 
sing such qualities and powers, as bid fair to obvi- 
ate, and remove obstructions which have taken place 
in the channels of the chyle and lymph. 

Hence, obstructions in the mesentery and glands 
will gradually be resolved, as this Water will be like- 
ly to dilute and dissolve any tenacious matter, inca- 
pable of moving in the chyliferous vessels, on account 
of its glutinous, cheese-like, and, steatomatous con- 
sistence, and, will stimulate the vessels, and, me- 
senteric glands, by its Saline contents, so as to en- 
able them to push on any obstructing matter. 

Some portion of the Waters, being absorbed, 
will act as a powerful deobstruent in obstructions of 
the liver. 

By thinning the Hepatic bile, and, carrying that 
fluid regularly into the intestines. By preventing 
the stagnation of bile in the gall-bladder. By gently 
stimulating the biliary vessels, and encreasing their 
action. In a word, by the united insluence of these 
powers, recent obstructions, or older scirrhosities, 
which have taken place either at home, or by resi- 
dence in warm climates, will be remodied. 

Calculous concretions in the biliary ducts, and, 
in the gall-bladder, when of a size capable of being 
|P_25
carried into the intestines, will be disposed to be mo- 
ved thither, by that stimulus, which acting originally 
on the duodenum, will extend its influence along 
the Ductus Choledochus. In like manner, new 
concretions of the biliary kind, will be effectually 
prevented. 

So that this Water will be found a very effectual 
remedy for jaundice arising from gall-stones, as well 
as from other causes, obstructing the discharge of the 
bile into the intestines. It will also be found useful 
in removing obstructions in the substance of the Li- 
ver; and, in preventing hemmorrhoidal, and other 
discharges of blood, which most frequently originate 
from obstructions in the Liver. 

Hemmorrhoidal swellings, and discharges of 
blood from other causes, obstructing, or retarding its 
motion, and, return through the branches of the 
vena portarum, will be eased or relieved by a seaso- 
nable use of this Water. 

The softness, which is peculiar to this Water, 
renders it proper in diseases of the urinary passages; 
as it acts powerfully on the Kidneys, and occasions 
an encreased secretion there, as well as in the intesti- 
nal tube; gravelly concretions will be prevented or 
washed away. As the secretion of urine is in expe- 
rience, sound essential, for carrying out of the body, 
the Salts and Oils, which are prejudicial to health; 
purity of blood will be very greatly promoted by the 
encrease of this secretion; so that by the free dis- 
|P_26
charge from this emunctory, along with that from 
the alimentary canal, the skin will be cleansed from 
hot red eruptions, and, from scaly, and scabby in- 
crustations, which notoriously arise from a blood, 
and habit overloaded with acrid, and impure matter; 
when by excess in diet, or by improper food, by im- 
perfect digestion, or inadequate secretion and excre- 
tion, such acrid corrupt matter is formed, and 
retained in our bodies. Gentle evacuation, by the 
use of such Waters, is generally a certain relief under 
these circumstances; this has been experienced 
by various persons, but very remarkably by one 
Tanner from Kidderminster, who has had a leprous 
eruption removed from his face, and other parts, by 
drinking the Walton Water, and, applying it ex- 
ternally; which relief, for six years past, he had 
not obtained by any means whatever. 

The preserving the bile in a fluid state, and, the 
regular conveyance of it into the duodenum, will 
powerfully operate in compleating the digestion, and 
Chylification of the food; and, will give the blood 
those properties, which support the health, and, 
vigour of the body.—With that, all cutaneous soul- 
ness will disappear, and, the bloom of beauty re-as- 
sume its charms, along with the ease, and cheerful- 
ness inseparable from wholesome sluids, and, from 
good health. 

By removing the somes, which causes Scurvies, 
Scrophulous, Herpetic eruptions, Leprosies, and, 
|P_27
every kind of cutaneous soulness, whether of the 
red, and pimply, or the scaly, and, ulcerous kinds; 
I say, by gradually draining off this fomes, and, 
soliciting its exit from the emunctories, such foul- 
nesses of the skin, accompanied with itchings, sores, 
and, even scirrhous, and, cancerous taints, will 
often be prevented, removed or palliated. 

Chronic weakness, and, dejection of spirits, 
arising frequently from the same latent sources, will 
receive relief from the salutary, though slow opera- 
tion of these Waters. 

Obstructions in the uterine system, suppres- 
sions of the menstrual discharge, and, other irregu- 
larities, and, excesses peculiar to it; the fluor albus, 
scirrhous tumours, and other diseases of the womb, 
will in many circumstances and constitutions, find 
a useful remedy in the Walton Water. 

Obstructions left by the long continuance, and, 
the frequent return of intermittent fevers, will, 
probably, yield to a prudent use of these Waters; 
and, they will prepare the patient, and, put him in 
a fit state to receive further benefit from the Bark. 

Obstructions in the Lungs, from a scorbutic cause, 
and, acrid humours in the blood, and inve- 
terate ophthalmia's, have been relieved, and, are 
likely to be successfully treated by the Walton 
Water. 

I shall not give many directions concerning the 
|P_28
use of this Water, professedly similar to that of 
Cheltenham, the method of drinking, of which, 
has been long ascertained by established usage, and, 
the public is possessed of the directions of eminent, 
and, able practitioners explanatory of their expe- 
rience, in this point. 

The Summer Months are the season to drink the 
Walton Waters; as they will, in these months, and, 
in dry weather be in their most perfect state of im- 
pregnation. 

Like Cheltenham, the Walton Waters are their 
own preparative; three quarters of a pint, drank at 
the Pump, may be taken in the morning, and after- 
noon, this quantity may be encreased to three half- 
pints afterwards, if the former quantity does not 
sufficiently open the body. 

But I would observe, that the middle doses, such 
as merely preserve the body in a lax state, not ex- 
ceeding three stools daily, are preferable to larger 
doses, and to greater evacuation; the business and 
intention, being to carry off the ill-digested remains 
of meals, perhaps of excess, and of luxury, and, of 
all kinds of corrupt recrementitious matter lodged in 
the alimentary canal, without impairing strength and 
digestion. 

Early hours are necessary to an advantageous use 
of the Waters at the Well, where only they are 
drank without the loss of the active Volatile ingredi- 
|P_29
ents, which give power to those that are more fixed, 
to penetrate into the glands, and smallest vessels. 

Exercise sub dio, is also equally proper to se- 
cond the operation of the Water, and to strengthen 
the body. 

An easy digested nutrient diet, consisting, when 
it agrees with the stomach, of milk in the morning 
and at night, of light meats and vegetables at dinner, 
with general temperance, and moderation in the use 
of vinous liquors, rather than total abstinence from them, 
is highly expedient. 

In a situation, where excellent fish is so plentiful, 
it is proper to observe, that moderation in this article 
will be prudent, as a very frequent use of fish is 
found often prejudicial in discases of the skin, and, 
sometimes produces the more obstinate diseases of 
that class; diseases, for which these Waters are pe- 
culiarly proper. 

It is almost superfluous to add, that, however 
useful it may be to entertain the mind with pleasing 
society, and, an agreeable succession of amusements, 
it is always necessary to retire to rest at an early hour, 
and, before eleven o'clock at farthest to be in bed, 
that the constitution may have the advantage of 
nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep. 

In the cutaneous diseases, and, many of the af- 
fections of the glands, for which the internal use of 
these Waters is proper; Baths of different degrees of 
|P_30
heat from that of common cold Water, to that of one 
hundred degrees of Fahrenheit's scale, will be highly 
expedient; this will appear in a stronger light, from 
what I shall offer concerning the sunctions, and dis- 
eases of the lymphatic glands. I apprehend, the 
diseases of these glands, are chiefly to be reached by 
the means of remedies, which are applied, so as to 
be absorbed by the lymphatic vessels, which pass to 
the glands. I am confident, that the most obstinate 
cutaneous, and glandular diseases would yield to a 
due perseverance in the external and internal use of 
Waters and other proper remedies. But what these 
remedies are, and, also the use, whether external or 
internal of Mineral Waters, and of Medicines of all 
kinds, which are to produce any important and salu- 
tary consequence, can only be determined in parti- 
cular cases, and constitutions, by the judgment of 
an able, and experienced physician. 

|P_
[}THOUGHTS
ON THE 
FUNCTIONS AND DISEASES
OF THE 
LYMPHATIC GLANDS. }]
|P_1
THE use of Mineral Waters in diseases of the 
glands, leads me to offer some thoughts, which, I 
believe, are either new, or have not been enough 
attended to, concerning the use, and diseases of the 
lymphatic glands. 

The lymphatic system, which makes an impor- 
tant article in the anatomical discoveries of the last 
century, has received much improvement in this. 
It is not my business to assign to each improver or 
discoverer, his due proportion of merit. I acknow- 
ledge my obligations to them all. To Haller, Meckel, 
Monro, Mr. Hewson, Dr. William Hunter, and 
Mr. John Hunter, Mr. Sheldon, and Mr. Cruik- 
shank; who have all contributed, and, some of 
them very splendidly, to perfect the knowledge of 
this important part of the animal system; and, let 
them not deem it amiss, that profiting by their labours, 
I endeavour to make them subservient to the know- 
ledge of the animal oeconomy, and to the healing 
art. 

|P_2
That the lymphatic vessels arise from every vis- 
cus, and, from every cavity in the body, as 
well as from the skin, and the cellular membrane investing 
the body, in prodigious, and till lately, in undisco- 
vered numbers, is an anatomical truth of the greatest 
importance, now clearly demonstrated, and univer- 
sally acknowledged. 

The lymphatic vessels, and lacteals are of the same 
kind, and, constitute a system of vessels, no where 
connected with the veins, containing red blood; but, 
which universally terminate in the lacteal sac and 
duct, and convey chyle, and lymph collected in 
every part into the subclaviam vein, where it mixes 
with the blood, and no where else. 

The, sole and exclusive function of this system of 
vessels is absorption. 

Some, indeed, have held, that the red veins are 
supplementary absorbents, especially on some occa- 
sions; and the illustrious Walther and others, with 
some probability, have assigned this office to the ve- 
na portarum, especially in diseases, in which the 
conglobate glands of the mesentery are scirrhous, or obliterated by age, as some have supposed, or, the 
lacteal sac, and duct itself is obstructed. The proofs 
of this are equivocal, and accounted for on different 
principles, by the school of Hunter, particularly, by 
that accurate anatomist, Mr. John Hunter, who 
first discovered that absorption is carried on by 
the lymphatic vessels alone. 

|P_3
The lacteal, and lymphatic vessels universally 
pass through conglobate glands, before the fluid they 
convey, reaches the lacteal duct; those arising from 
the intestines, enter the different orders of mesen- 
teric glands, and, the chyle and lymph deposited in 
these glands, is again absorbed from them by the 
vasa lymphatica efferentia, in order to be conveyed 
to the thoracic duct. [/4./]

This law is universal, and, the lymphatic veins 
wherever they arise, in no instance enter into the 
lacteal duct, without previously, and repeatedly 
throwing the lymph into the conglobate glands, 
which are an essential part of this system, a part of 
the greatest importance, for the advantage of which, 
the lymph is absorbed, in order to be conveyed to 
them; and from them the lymph is taken up in a 
more purified, and assimilated state, and is conveyed 
by the lymphatica efferentia into the lacteal sac and 
duct. 

The structure of these glands is both vascular and 
cellular; into these cells the lymph is thrown, and 
the absorbing lymphatics, the lymphatica efferentia, 
are the only excretories, to all the conglobate glands; 
the uses of which are acknowledged to be unknown 
and undiscovered, by gentlemen to whom anatomists 
are so much indebted, Messrs. Sheldon and Cruik- 
shank, the latest improvers of the lymphatic system. [/5./]

|P_4
Yet it is a matter not only interesting in the sci- 
ence of physiology, to ascertain their use, but is like- 
wise necessary to enable us to understand more per- 
fectly the diseases of the glands, and, to treat them 
with success: we will therefore pursue the enquiry. 

A fluid is constantly exhaled into the cavities 
containing the viscera; this fluid is liable to be altered, 
either by remora or mixture; the absorption of this 
fluid is the function of the internal lymphatics, and, 
when it is prevented, either by obstruction of the 
conglobate glands, or, by any other cause; Dropsies 
in the brain, thorax, pericardium, abdomen, and 
the widely diffused cellular membrane, arise. 

The lymph along with the chyle, and nutritious 
liquors prepared from the food in the intestinal 
|P_5
canal, is absorbed by the lacteal and lymphatic vessels, 
for they are the same; these fluids are immediately 
thrown into the mesenteric glands; and, they are 
more numerous there than in other parts, because 
their office is peculiarly important, that of perfecting 
the chyle or nutritious fluid, extracted by digestion 
from food. That fluid is perfected by intercepting 
what is noxious in the cells of the conglobate glands, 
where it undergoes a digestion before it is absorbed 
by the second and third orders of the lacteal vessels. 

Numerous lymphatic vessels, arise also from the 
stomach, intestines, and from the glandular viscera; 
from the pelvis, the bladder, and parts of genera- 
tion, both in males and females; they observe the 
same law, and pass through the iliac conglobate 
glands, or others before they enter the lacteal sac; 
and, their use is the same, to intercept crude, nox- 
ious, unassimilated matter, which has been ren- 
dered unfit by disease, or other means to mix imme- 
diately, and unaltered, with the blood. 

The food we take in, and the air we breathe, 
while they convey the necessary supports of life, 
contain also the feeds of disease and death. 

The lymphatic vessels, which arise in the mouth, 
and, from the trachea and lungs, (where their num- 
ber is immense), convey the fluids they absorb, with 
whatever extraneous matter has been taken up to the 
numerous conglobate glands of the neck, to the thy- 
roid gland, thymus, and the glands of the lungs, 
|P_6
where it is digested before it reaches the thoracic 
duct. 

In young animals who take in their food by suc- 
tion, in which action much is absorbed by the lym- 
phatics; the glands are very large, numerous and 
conspicuous, the more perfectly to digest, and anima- 
lise the crude fluids received by suction, with the 
milk. 

When that period of life is passed over, the thy- 
roid glands and thymus are not quite so necessary, 
and abate in size, but are never totally obliterated. 

In pointing out the business of purifying, and 
animalising lymph, as the function, of the conglo- 
bate glands in general, I believe I have discovered 
the use of the thymus in infants, and, of the thy- 
roid glands, hitherto one of the hidden mysteries 
in anatomy. [/6./]

The external surface of the body, is no less ab- 
sorptive, fluids are imbibed, thirst abated, urine and 
weight encreased from thence. Garlick, externally 
applied is soon smelled in the breath. Turpentine 
gives the urine a violet smell. Variolous matter, 
and the venereal poison introduced by the smallest 
puncture, produce similar diseases, and, previous to 
universal infection and diffusion, the inguinal and 
axillary glands, are swelled and inflamed by the pas- 
sage of the poison into them. Mercury, the anti- 
|P_7
dote to this poison, also enters freely by the skin. 
Blisters applied to the arms and shoulders inflame 
the axillary glands; those of the neck in children, 
particularly are made hard and sore by ulcers behind 
the ears, and in the head, and, by blisters to those 
parts. 

Ulcers and punctures in the legs, and other 
parts, often occasion swellings along the lymphatics 
up to, the axillæ, or inguinal glands. Purulent 
bubos arise frequently from such ulcers, and, from 
matter formed in the joints. The axillary glands are 
swelled by stagnating milk, by cancerous swellings, 
and inflammations in the breast. Cancers in the lips 
and on the face, cause similar swellings under the 
lower jaw, and, in the neck. The same glands are 
swelled by gum boils, and by venereal sores in the 
lips. Acrid matter absorbed, inflames the lympha- 
tic vessel, and, the gland, universally, between the 
seat of the matter and sore, and, the thoracic duct; 
and, its entrance into the body, may be prevented 
by caustic, or, by the excision of the part. Pow- 
ders scattered over the surface of the body are absor- 
bed, thus calomel is known to enter; and, I remem- 
ber a degree of salivation, and sore mouth, produced 
by a small quantity of corrosive sublimate, rubbed 
with crude sal armoniac and camphire scattered on 
bed linen, in order to prevent a morbus pediculosus. 

When we consider these various facts, that all 
lymphatic vessels perpetually enter the conglobate 
|P_8
glands, and, in the cells, of which these glands uni- 
versally consist, deposite the lymph, which being 
absorbed once, and, again by larger lymphatics, is 
at length conveyed by the great channel, the lacteal 
duct, into the vena cava descendens, under the left 
calavicle. When we recollect, that the Venereal 
Virus, Cancerous and Variolous poisons, enter the 
body by these channels, and, and are primarily de- 
posited in these glands, occasioning there tumours, 
sometimes indolent, sometimes painful, inflamed and 
suppurating. It seems clear, these glands are intend- 
ed by nature, to purify the lymph, before it enters the 
blood vessels, from matter, which may be noxious 
there, by arresting it in the glands, universally con- 
nected with absorbents. 

In these glands, it is either altered by a concoc- 
ting, and digesting power inherent in them, or when 
it is too noxious to be subdued into a salutary nature 
it remains in the form of a tumour, or escapes by 
suppuration. When it cannot be subdued, nor re- 
moved by suppuration, and, those salutary efforts of 
nature fail, it is then absorbed, and, diffuses disease 
in the constitution at large. 

Thus the glands in the neck, and the thyroid are 
interposed to intercept crude matter, or noxious Vi- 
rus taken up from the nostrils, mouth, trachea 
and lungs, and other parts about the neck and breast, 
more especially in very young animals. 

The mesenteric glands purify, and digest, what- 
|P_9
ever is absorbed with the lymph and chyle from 
the intestines. 

The axillary, and inguinal glands, alter and in- 
tercept whatever extraneous matter may happen to 
be absorbed from the surface of the body, or the cel- 
lular membrane. 

The glands have the power of assimilating into 
a sound fluid, such noxious matter, in very many 
instances. But when it is highly virulent as in the 
lues, in scrophulous, and in cancerous diseases, that 
digesting and assimilating function is overpowered, 
the gland remains scirrhous, or, is destroyed by sup- 
puration, and, the matter enters, and contaminates 
the habit. 

In fine, the use of these glands is to intercept as 
sponges, and to alter as digestive organs, whatever 
is unfit to enter into the mass of blood. In ordinary 
cases, this is effected without obstruction, or, inflam- 
mation, and, then no apparent consequences detri- 
mental to health appear, and, the deposited matter 
is absorbed again, and, goes along with the sound 
lymph. In extraordinary cases, the poison remains 
in the gland, and, destroys its powers first, and its 
substance, and organization afterwards. 

The fatal consequences, which have followed in- 
jections of undigested alimentary fluids, directly into 
the red veins of living animals, are proofs that the 
lymphatic glands have the use and function here 
|P_10
alledged, and, show, that without the lymphatic diges- 
tion, liquors apparently harmless, are unfit to mix 
with the blood; and, produce fatal effects there. [/7./]

How the glands alter, digest, and assimilate the 
matter absorbed, and deposited in them, I know not, 
and shall not attempt to explain; I think that power 
implanted in them, as well as in the stomach and 
intestines; and, we see an important apparatus, set 
apart for the purpose, by Him! whose ability is too 
great, in every instance to be fully comprehended, 
and interpreted by us his creatures. 

From the uses here ascribed to the lymphatic 
glands we see, why they are most numerous, where 
absorption is greatest; and, particularly in those 
parts, where crude matter is absorbed. We see, 
why the glands are nearly as numerous in the neck 
as in the mesentery [/8./]; for beside the matter absor- 
bed from the inside of the mouth, nostrils, and 
trachea; the absorbents from the brain join the 
glands of the neck. Though these have not been 
traced by anatomists; as a copious exhalation, and, 
absorption constantly take place in the ventricles of 
that organ; as we have reason to believe, the Water 
in the internal hydrocephalus is sometimes absorbed; 
from the general law, we may presume, that lym- 
phatics exist in the brain, though not certainly 
traced there [/9./]; this is confirmed by the internal 
|P_11
cephalus often happening in scrophulous and ricketty 
children, in whom the glands of the neck are scirr- 
hous. 

It is well known, that swellings of the glands of- 
ten follow cruptive diseases. They arise after scar- 
let fever, measles and small pox. Dropsy, is some- 
times the consequence of them all. And I have 
known the hydrocephalus internus, as well as other 
Dropsies succeed the scarlet fever; another presump- 
tive proof, that absorption in the brain, is carried 
on by lymphatic vessels, as well as in other parts. 

We also, see why the glands are more numerous 
in the mesentery, through which all the chyle passes 
and are smaller, and less numerous in the mesocolon, 
through which hardly any chyle passes, whence Mr. 
Cruikshank is led to say, "this looks as if the glands 
were intended to produce some remarkable change 
in the chyle" [/10./]. 

The mesenteric glands, as well as the conglobate 
glands in other parts, being cellular, as well as vas- 
cular, contain a white milky fluid, most conspicuous 
and abundant in young animals. Album perpetuo re- 
peri, says, Haller, Elem. Phys. T. 1. 

These glands, though greatly less in adults than 
in young animals, are yet not totally obliterated. 
The illustrious Haller, has seen the thymus in the me- 
diastinum, and the glands in the mesentery, and in 
|P_12
the intestinum rectum in adults; in children, they 
are very large and succulent, Elem. Phys. T. 1. p. 192. 

The lymphatic vessels being destitute of the mo- 
ving impulse of the heart, and having no other prin- 
ciple of motion to carry on the liquors absorbed, but 
that of the irritability of the lymphatic system, the 
motion of the lymph is necessarily liable to be ob- 
structed. Hence obstructions happen more fre- 
quently in the conglobate and lymphatic glands, 
than in the conglomerate glands. The liver may be 
excepted, because the blood conveyed into it by the 
vena portarum, undergoes a similar retardation in 
that very singular vein. 

The conglobate glands, are hence universally lia- 
ble to scirrhosity and obstruction. The mesenteric 
glands are notoriously liable to great enlargement and 
hardness, and thereby often cause a slow consuming 
sever and atrophy in infants. Similar swellings in the 
mesenteric glands are sometimes observed from 
ulcerated intestines after dysentery. The neck is sel- 
dom strumous without accompanying obstructions in 
the mesenteric glands. 

The thyroid axillary and mammary glands, as 
well as the iliac lumbar and inguinal glands are all 
frequently sound obstructed and scirrhous. In a 
word these glands are not only obstructed in venereal 
and cancerous habits; but the scrophula and rachitis 
likewise originate in them, and are principally seated 
in the glands. 

|P_13
In all cases of obstructed glands, the chyle and 
lymph, being imperfectly assimilated, the blood be- 
comes gradually vitiated, and, unfit for nourishment. 
Hence that acrimony often called scorbutic; an ul- 
cerous and even cancerous disposition of fluids origi- 
nate. From the same source the bones become brit- 
tle, break in some, and are rendered soft and flexible 
in others. 

All these facts conspire to shew the importance 
of the digestive, and assimilating power of the 
glands, and, lymphatic system, in perfecting the 
animal fluids. 

In diseased glands, the chyle is not sufficiently 
assimilated, and, that defect gradually induces acri- 
mony, and impurity in the lymph, which soon taints 
the blood and habit universally. 

It is more from this defect, than from the en- 
trance of the chyle into the blood, being prevented 
by obstruction, that marasmus, and consumption 
follow scirrhosities in the mesentric glands. 

"It is possible, " says, the ingenious Cruikshank, 
"that children, and, even grown persons, may have 
died of the tabes mesenterica from obstructions in 
the glands, rendering them impervious to the 
chyle. " But he never saw any such stagnation of 
chyle, as these are supposed to cause, on any occa- 
sion whatever. [/11./]

|P_14
The lymph, and chyle, enter the blood but in a 
corrupted, crude, unanimalised state. 

I am confirmed in this opinion, by the experi- 
ments of another excellent Anatomist, Mr. Sheldon, 
which I shall quote from his splendid History of the 
Human Lacteal Vessels. 

In subjects, in which the lymphatic glands of the 
mesentery, were found entirely obstructed, sometimes 
by a curd-like substance, sometimes by calcareous 
earth, Mr. Sheldon, could push injections of quick- 
silver from the vessels, below the obstructed glands, 
to those above them, though not a single particle of 
quicksilver, could be made to enter the glands in this 
obstructed state. In this case, the collateral branches 
of the lacteal vessels, which communicated with 
those above, were enlarged, and, had conveyed the 
chyle into the lacteal duct. 

The ingenious Dr. Cheston, found the cavity of 
the lacteal duct totally obstructed for a considerable 
length, by an earthy matter, in a man who had a 
Spina Ventosa of the os ilium. 

It is probable, the chyle, in this case, was con- 
veyed from below, into the lacteal duct, above the 
obstruction, by one or more collateral anastomosing 
branches, which are every where numerous in the 
lymphatic vessels, and, frequent in the lacteal duct 
itself. This being a provision of nature, for securing 
more certainly, a regular conveyance of the chyle in- 
to the blood vessels. 

|P_15
I remember a melancholy case, which shews 
the thoracic duct, sometimes is obstructed in a fatal 
degree; a young lady, high in rank, beautiful in 
person, and amiable in disposition; had a swelling 
in the neck, which extended itself under the left cla- 
vicle, and there obstructed the entrance of the tho- 
racic duct into the subclavian vein so completely, 
as to render her incurably dropsical in every part of 
her body. 

What I have now offered, concerning the use of 
the glands, belonging to the lymphatic system, will, 
I apprehend, derive support from the late discove- 
ries, and will be found useful in the treatment of dis- 
eases of the glands. 

Medicines taken into the stomach, and mixed 
with the chyle, are, indeed, in the direct channel, 
to reach the diseased glands of the mesentery. 

But this is not the case, respecting the conglo- 
bate glands in other parts. Medicines mixing with 
the blood never directly reach these glands. and, but 
very remotely, and indirectly affect them; and, this 
is one of the reasons why, diseases in these glands, 
have always appeared so stubborn, and have so rare- 
ly yielded to the common treatment, and internal 
use of Medicine. 

The confiding alone to Medicines, conveyed by 
the lacteals into the channel of circulation; the in- 
attention to the only entrance into the external disea- 
|P_16
sed glands, that by absorption, are I am persuaded, 
causes why those diseases have proved so obstinate, 
and rebellious to Medical treatment. 

It is the cause why scrophula, and scirhous 
glands, have become cancerous, and finally incu- 
rable and fatal. 

It is evident then, that the remedies proper for 
removing obstructions should be applied to such 
parts, from whence the lymphatics arise which may 
absorb and conduct them to the glands, the obstruc- 
tions of which are to be removed. 

Applications intended to remove glandular swel- 
lings in the neck, the thyroid gland, the bronchocele 
&c. must be made to the head, neck, cheeks, and 
mouth internally, as well as externally. 

Vapours inhaled by inspiration, are proper in 
the diseased glands of the lungs. 

Remedies intended to pass into the axillary 
glands, must be applied to the arms and breast. 

In diseases of the inguinal glands the remedies 
intended to pass into them, and through them, must 
be applied to the genitals, and to the legs and thighs. 

The advantages found from the local application 
of Mercury in Venereal swellings of the inguinal, 
and axillary glands, and in ulcers of the throat, ex- 
emplify this doctrine in that disease. 

|P_17
The holding Medicines intended to remove the 
bronchocele, and swelled neck, in the mouth 
and under the tongue, is essential to give efficacy to 
these Medicines, as has been long experienced, in 
the Coventry Medicine. The saline ingredients, 
whether alcaline, or neutral, of which such Medi- 
cines usually consist, are absorbed by the lymphatic 
vessels arising in the inside of the mouth, and, are 
conveyed directly to the diseased glands with con- 
stant good effect. 

Internal obstructions in the mesentery in parti- 
cular, are to be relieved by internal Medicines; and 
in every kind of glandular obstruction Mineral Wa- 
ters have been found highly necessary and useful. 

The Chalybeate, the sulphureous, the saline, the 
hot, and the cold Waters, have all been tried with 
advantage. 

Of laxative Medicines, the purgative Mineral 
Waters, always operate with the least diminution 
of strength, and with the least disturbance; the ap- 
petite is for the most part mended under their use, 
and important alterations in the whole system, arise 
from continuing to apply to them. Their operation 
principally affects the first passages in clearing away 
what is recrimentitious, and hurtful in that seat and 
source of corruption. 

They next directly operate on the lacteal vessels 
and glands; they dilute the chyle, and stimulate the 
|P_18
lacteals themselves, which are sufficiently irritable; 
and remove thereby, both the source of obstruction, 
and the obstructions, which may have taken place, in 
the conglobate glands of the mesentery. 

In this manner they contribute to the purity, and 
perfection of the chyle and lymph, and remove all 
obstacles, to its perfect digestion in the intestinal ca- 
nal, and in the lacteal vessels and glands. 

Hence this source of tainted fluids being taken 
away from the chyle and blood, and no new acrimo- 
nious deposition falling on the remoter parts of the 
body; the lymphatic vessels and glands, there reas- 
sume their functions, and, absorb and digest, what 
was before lodged on the skin, and on the adjacent 
parts of the surface of the body. 

Thus, under the use of such Waters, continued 
for a sufficient length of time, depositions, eruptions 
and defedations of the skin, with ulcers and glandu- 
lar swellings disappear. It is thus the Harrowgate, 
Cheltenham and Walton Waters prove beneficial. 

The Sea Water, acts not only as a powerful in- 
ternal remedy in the same diseases; but has its effi- 
cacy greatly promoted by bathing; washing thereby 
away much cutaneous foulness, and removing more 
by being directly absorbed into the lymphatic's, and 
conveyed to the diseased glands; at the same time, 
that a useful spring and vigour is given to the whole 
constitution. 

|P_19
I might illustrate the practical importance of these 
principles by cases, but this letter being already too 
long, I now commit it to your consideration. To you! 
who joining reading to experience and talents, make 
the healing art your study and delight. 

From you, my humble but zealous endeavours to 
excite the attention of the younger and liberal Gen- 
tlemen of the profession, to improved methods of 
curing diseases, are sure of a candid reception. 

As to others whose sole pursuit and study is gain; 

Quærenda pecunia primum est, 
Virtus post nummos. 
I have not wrote for them, and have certainly 
no attention to expect from them. 

I am, &c. 
JAMES JOHNSTONE.

Worcester,Aug. 20, 
1787. 

FINIS. 
