
|P_
[}TO THE 
RIGHT HONOURABLE 
THE LORD RAWDON. }]
MY LORD, 

THE very slight personal knowledge 
which I have of your Lordship could 
not have justified me in the liberty I 
take in prefixing to this most humble 
little work your Lordship's name, had 
I not been well informed, by gentlemen 
of the highest integrity and honour, 
|P_vi
who are perfectly acquainted with your 
Lordship, of your uncommon philan- 
thropy and goodness of heart—General 
report, my Lord, has indeed said suf- 
ficient in your praise to entitle you to 
the world's approbation — But when 
these were signed, sealed, and delivered 
to me, by the very respectable charac- 
ters before mentioned, it became a most 
complete ratification of your inestima- 
ble worth. 

It is not, then, my Lord, to your 
rank in life that I wish here to pay my 
respects, but to those virtues which 
adorn your mind, giving to nobility 
that true and unsading lustre which 
can alone render it complete, and which 
have so eminently distinguished your 
|P_vii
Lordship as the hero in the field, the 
real and independent patriot in the se- 
nate, in private life the friend to merit, 
and incessant benefactor to the poor! 

It is these, and these alone, my Lord, 
that I admire — and had they been 
placed in any other well-formed bosom 
of inferior rank in life to your Lordship 
I should equally have paid my tribute 
to them, "The widow's mite;" con- 
vinced that the offering, however small, 
that breathes good will towards man- 
kind cannot fail of being acceptable to 
one of your Lordship's exalted charac- 
ter: and if in the subsequent pages I 
should be so happy as to have given any 
hints that prove of service to my fellow 
citizens, &c., and be found worthy of 
|P_viii
your Lordship's approbation, it will be 
of no little satisfaction to a person who 
has the honour to subscribe himself, 

With the most profound respect, 
My Lord, 
Your Lordship's most obedient 
And most humble Servant, 
J. W. THOMPSON. 

|P_
[}TO THE 
PUBLIC.}]
THE title of this pamphlet required that it 
should be written in the plainest and most simple 
language, which I have endeavoured to do by 
avoiding as much as possible all technical words, a 
few excepted, (and those by no means essential to 
many whether they understand them or not, as they 
cannot be embarrassed for want of knowing them in 
the use of the pills, the directions for which are 
clear and intelligible to the lowest capacity) but 
what may be found in an English dictionary, to 
which such as read can have recourse, and they 
who are so unfortunate as not to be able will re- 
ceive information from those that can, which I am 
certain every truly generous mind will be happy to 
give them. For the preceding reasons the Author 
trusts that such recapitulations as the judicious 
|P_2
reader meets with in the course of this work will 
be excused, his wish being to render every thing 
respecting the medicine it treats of, &c., as plain 
and easy as possible to the common reader. 

The Antibilious Alterative Pills is a most in- 
comparable remedy for all indispositions of the 
stomach and bowels arising from bile, foulness, in- 
digestion, worms, acidity, ardor ventriculi, (or 
heartburn, so called) predigestion, flatulency, (that 
many headed monster), costiveness, &c., &c., which 
last often produces several of the foregoing, as well 
as many other, complaints, owing to the feces or 
excrement becoming highly putrid from too long retention 
in the body, thereby forming a nidus, or nest of 
predisposing putrefaction, which meeting with ma- 
lignant exhalations in the air, or those arising from 
infected persons or places, &c., &c., &c., the most 
dreadful fevers, agues, inflammatory disorders of 
various kinds, scurvy, erysipelas or St. Anthony's 
fire, rheumatism, leprosy, jaundice, cruptive com- 
plaints, and numberless others, are occasioned: 
hence arises the necessity of paying the most reli- 
gious attention to the first passages of the body, 
which the able and judicious physician never fails to 
make the first object of his consideration. The 
stomach is the grand reservoir which receives and 
prepares whatever is to support and nourish the 
whole machine, consequently if that is out of re- 
pair, or diseased from any of the before-mentioned 
causes, or others, whatever is taken into such a 
|P_3
stomach must assuredly fail, more or less, of pro- 
ducing the natural and intended effect, and, instead 
of properly nourishing the body, sends periodically 
into the circulation—since blood is made from what we 
eat and drink—a portion of diseased matter, which, 
congregating by degrees, must inevitably occasion 
various disorders in the system; and although the 
efforts of nature to relieve herself from the variety 
of attacks made upon her are often great and won- 
derful, (and always should be attended to) yet 
without the assistance of art, seasonably and pro- 
perly administered, she frequently finks under the 
burden. The same All-good Being that provided 
remedies for the brute part of the creation, made 
them also for man; the former are directed by in- 
stinct to theirs, the latter should have recourse to 
reason and experience. 

Those Pills, then, which, in conscious rectitude, 
I now venture to offer to the Public, are the atten- 
tive result of thirty years extensive practice in va- 
rious parts of the world, (upwards of twenty of 
which I passed in His Majesty's service, in the 
army); the officers and soldiers of which, (to whom 
I have the honour to be known) and whom I beg 
leave, in this humble, little pamphlet, to invoke, 
will, I doubt not, do me the justice to speak as, I 
presume to think, my conduct and character merit, 
that of being indefatigable, attentive, and candid, 
in my profession, and successful in my practice: I 
have the same expectations from those amongst 
|P_4
whom I have now practised above ten years in this 
capital. 

I am, however, well aware that this address (and 
the object of it) is likely to subject me to the sar- 
castical sneers of some of the wonderful geniuses of 
the faculty, many of whom owe, however, perhaps 
their most exalted fame to the secret use of Dr. 
James's powder, and other medicines of that de- 
scription. There are besides, I make no doubt, 
some other thrusts I must be prepared to parry 
from those uninformed, contracted minds, who term 
every medicine, the constituent parts of which the 
proprietor keeps in secret, a quack medicine, and re- 
fuse to take it on that account; at the same time 
swallow abundantly the prescriptions of the apothe- 
cary and physician, of which they have just as much 
knowledge as of the ingredients that compose my 
pills. But to such I shall only observe, that they 
are totally ignorant of the true meaning of the word 
quack, that epithet being only applicable to illite- 
rate pretenders, not properly bred to the profession, 
and unacquainted with its practice; otherwise it must 
necessarily follow that every man, of whatever art, 
science, or profession, who improves an old, or in- 
vents any new thing, because he will not divulge 
the secret, becomes indisputably a quack; conse- 
quently there must be quack lawyers and preachers, 
who profit well by keeping mankind in secret dark- 
ness; quack painters, coblers, tinkers, and taylors; 
and it may not be unfair to add, quack physicians of 
|P_5
State, who, notwithstanding their feeling regard for 
His Majesty's loyal subjects, will not blush to crib a 
shilling's worth of pills out of The poor Man's Me- 
dicine Chest (stamp duty) to administer to the hectic 
constitution of the State, and relieve the canine ap- 
petite of minions, placemen and pensioners. Here 
stop for a moment, Humanity! and reflect upon 
what the sensations of that man's heart must be who 
first suggested this benevolent tax, extorted from the 
painful afflictions and miseries of the sick, particularly 
the lower orders of society, who are frequently 
obliged to seek relief from what are termed quack 
medicines, after perhaps having spent nearly their 
little all in vain endeavours to obtain it from the 
most eminent gentlemen of the faculty.—A nostrum 
they may term my medicine, if they please, for such 
it is, (and of which most of the faculty have to 
boast a few); but which I shall be ready to make 
known to the Public for a proper gratuity, whenever 
it shall be found to answer, as I am confident it will 
do, to all such as give it a fair and impartial trial. 

I should not have presumed to take up so much of 
the reader's time as I have done in this address, or 
have appeared so much my own panegyrist, as most 
probably I shall be thought, but with a view to re- 
move as much as possible the prejudices which ge- 
nerally (and sometimes justly) attend on addresses 
of this sort, particularly when unsanctioned by a 
voluminous publication entered at Stationers' Hall 
—a mode quite in fashion with modern practitioners, 
|P_6
who begin their career that way to attract public 
notice; in works of which description the press al- 
ready teems with too many in the medical line, the 
mere offspring of lectures, and stuffed with the wri- 
ter's own and borrowed hypotheses, unestablished 
and inadmissible in practice, serving only to bewilder 
and lead the Public into fatal errors. 

Hippocrates says the description of the causes and 
treatment of diseases should not be the suppositions 
of ingenious men, (for all hypotheses, says that 
learned father of the faculty, I reject as useless, 
nay dangerous, in physic) but from certain means 
often tried on human bodies, the effects of which 
bear evident proof to our senses, all our reasonings 
should be drawn; not but I ever wish to see in print 
the well-digested sentiments of able and experienced 
men of the profession: it is their duty to give them, 
and the world are indebted to them for such—such 
as will stand the test and command the sanction of 
the critical reviewer without fear, partiality, or 
bribe. 

In short, in my private opinion, the study of 
physic is by no means so difficult, or involved in 
such labyrinths, as many writers would make the 
world believe. A proper knowledge of the human 
system, with strict attention to the efforts and ope- 
rations of nature, joined to a quick perceptibility 
on the part of the practitioner to watch and catch 
the critical period when she can't relieve herself, and 
|P_7
then to assist her cautiously by the proper and expe- 
rienced use of such aid as Providence has provided 
for that purpose, is the only task of a physician. 

Having now said as much as I think is necessary 
to offer (in this place) to a discerning Public in be- 
half of my Box of Pills, &c., I shall proceed to 
give as clear and concise directions as possible for 
their use in the complaints already mentioned, and 
some others, making some farther remarks as I go 
along. 

[}DIRECTIONS. }]
For a grown person, a common dose of these pills is 
three, one to be taken going to bed, and two the 
next morning. Strong constitutions may take two 
night and morning, and some have taken three 
night and morning; but in general one at night and 
two in the morning is sufficient, and many require 
only one night and morning. 

A child of one year old may take a third part of 
one of the pills; from three years to five, half a 
pill, and from five to ten a whole pill; and so on in 
proportion to age and strength. As it may be diffi- 
cult to make children swallow a pill, it may be dis- 
solved in any simple liquid, or mixed with a little 
pap or currant jelly. 

|P_8
My reason for preferring part of the dose to be 
taken over night is, that, by gradually dissolving 
whilst the body is at rest, it mixes more readily 
with the offending matter in the stomach, &c., 
thereby exciting it into action, renders the remain- 
ing part of the dose more effectual and speedy in its 
operation in the morning. 

As these pills are a declared enemy to bile, when- 
ever that is in the stomach they never fail to vomit, 
and sometimes one pill in the course of the night 
will operate both ways; not owing to the violence 
or strength of the medicine, as some may be in- 
duced to think, but from the great soulness and 
plenitude of the stomach and bowels at the time be- 
ing overloaded with bilious filth or too-long-retained 
feces — a self-evident position which must appear 
clear to every intelligent capacity — therefore should 
the night pill only operate by vomit, the patient 
must not be deterred from taking more in the morn- 
ing; for after the stomach has been well cleansed of 
its contents, two or three more pills will only occa- 
sion as many stools without any farther sickness. If 
after the first dose any part of the cause which in- 
duced taking them should appear to remain, they 
may be taken daily, or every other day, until all the 
offending matter is carried off. 

During their operation it will be proper to drink 
a draught of gruel, beef or chamomile tea, or some 
such simple liquid, to sacilitate each operation, and 
|P_9
render it more effectual, which the patient will do 
well to have in readiness previous to taking the 
pills. 

This efficacious medicine, though sometimes so 
brisk in operating, is notwithstanding, I do aver, 
as innocent and as safe as a dose of salts, rhubarb, 
or a common emetic, and may be taken at all times 
and seasons with as little risk or danger, as they will 
always find their way out of the body by vomit, 
stool, or urine, and quietly by the latter, unless 
when they meet with such humours in their passage 
as required being carried off by the other outlets. 

The advantages, then, arising from these pills, 
according to this unvarnished account, must be 
many, and great. 

First, By effectually cleansing the stomach, that 
grand reservoir is put in a proper state to perform 
the important offices, for which nature intended it, 
of digestion, &c. 
Secondly, By removing all long-retained feces, 
and bilious, slimy matter from the lower bowels, 
fevers, jaundice, agues, cholic, worms, flatulency,
inslammatory tendency, rhcumatism, &c., &c., are 
cut off in the bud and destroyed. 
Thirdly, In filtering by the kidnies and urinary 
passages, gravelly concretions, dropsy, &c., are hap- 
|P_10
pily relieved and prevented; and lastly, by con- 
veying accumulated salts and other acrid and feculant 
humours out of the blood by this channel, leprosy, 
scurvy, scrophulous humours, and many eruptive 
complaints, and other foulnesses of the blood arising 
from thence, as well as all that tribe of complaints 
termed nervous, originating from the same source, 
(since the nerves as well as the rest of the body re- 
ceive their nourishment from the blood) are pre- 
vented, and often cured. 
Hence it will appear that these pills are not only 
an effectual cleanser of the stomach and bowels, but 
also a most POWERFUL ALTERATIVE. 

To which end, after having properly prepared the 
body by two or three common doses, taken in the 
space of a week or ten days, the patient should then 
enter on the alterative course, first by taking one pill 
at night for four or five nights successively, after- 
wards take one night and morning; continuing 
these as long as any part of the cause or effect which 
induced taking them appears to remain; and it will 
not be amiss to continue them some little time 
longer, (for it sometimes happens that causes re- 
main after effects vanish; and frequently it happens, 
as, for instance, in the small pox, that effects, 
such as a redness of the skin, &c., remain for some 
time after the cause is removed) observing to in- 
crease the night or morning dose occasionally to keep 
the body gently open. It having been already re- 
|P_11
marked, that after the stomach has been well cleansed 
they cease to act as an emetic; for as the bodies of 
some are constitutionally costive, it may become 
necessary in such habits to increase the dose as just 
mentioned, yet, in general, a pill night and morn- 
ing not only relieves the most costive habits, but one 
will prove sufficient in most constitutions for that 
purpose. Here it may not be improper to remark, 
that costive habits are more subject than others to 
offensive and fetid breath, (particularly children 
whose powers of digestion are by no means equal to 
the too great quantity of strong and improper food 
they commonly take in); which idea perhaps may 
be one motive why the French have such frequent 
recourse to lavement, or clyster. I say it has been 
already observed that our blood is made from what 
we take into the stomach, from whence is prepared 
that milky liquid called chyle, which forms the basis 
of the blood, the whole process of which is per- 
formed within the space of twenty-four hours; 
after which period the feces or excrement can answer 
no good purpose by remaining in the body, since all 
their nutritive and essential parts (good or bad, 
which depends upon the nature of the food so taken 
in and state of the stomach) has been extracted for 
the above purpose. Now as the feces in the most 
healthy constitutions are rendered highly offensive 
when discharged at the end, or in the course of that 
time, how much more putrid must they inevitably 
become if retained for days or weeks, as is very 
|P_12
often the case in relaxed and weak habits, more 
especially such as lead sedentary and inactive lives! 

During the alterative course it will be highly ne- 
cessary for the patient to observe such mode in diet 
as is calculated to aid and assist the intention of the 
medicine, by avoiding all salted, high-seasoned, and inflammatory food; yet notwithstanding to partake 
of such proper innocent and nourishing food as is 
sufficient to keep up the bodily strength and pro- 
duce good juices; for my wish is not to reduce the 
patient's strength, only to conquer the disease, and 
by supporting the constitution properly they will be 
the better enabled to obtain that end. But as it is 
impossible to give a bill of fare suitable to every 
constitution, palate, and situation in life, suffice it, 
therefore, to say, that the food should be simple, 
easy of digestion, nutritive, plain dressed, and mo- 
derately taken; that is, not to load the stomach 
with too much at one time, but rather to eat as in- 
stinctive animals do in a state of nature, little and 
often—a hint from thence is no bad precedent, for 
nature will ever be found to exceed the best philoso- 
phical reasonings of art. 

After what has been already said, I think it al- 
most unnecessary to add, that such as are accustomed 
to take physic in the spring and autumn will find 
this the best they can have recourse to. Indeed no 
person, however healthy, would be the worse for 
employing this friendly scavenger once or twice a 
|P_13
month; and all such who are so unfortunate as to 
labour under a very fashionable disease will find these 
pills a most certain remedy, (taken agreeable to the 
alterative course just laid down), without having their 
bodies loaded, like a barometer, with mercury, 
owing to the too liberal use of which, in the present 
practice, many unsortunate beings (though cured of 
that disease) are left a wreck, subject, like the ma- 
thematical instrument, to every vicissitude of wea- 
ther, to trail out a miserable existence. 

Women also at the turn of life would do well to 
pay strict attention to this medicine, being in every 
respect calculated to carry off the humours which 
nature often, embarrassed with at that critical pe- 
riod, throws on the legs and other parts of the body, 
rendering the remainder of their days painful, and 
often burdensome. 

And even women with child need not be afraid to 
take these pills (because they sometimes vomit) to 
remove that costiveness they are commonly subject 
to in that situation. Since vomiting is a natural at- 
tendant upon pregnant women, (and sometimes vio- 
lently so) particularly in their first pregnancy, which 
the wisdom of Providence has so ordered, no doubt, 
for the best of ends; and if any danger was likely 
to ensue from that operation, we might surely ex- 
pect it at that time, when all the bowels are more 
than ordinarily compressed from the extension of 
the uterus and weight of the foetus; yet who ever 
|P_14
heard of any such women being injured by vo- 
miting? 

In the course of my practice I never met with 
any instance of the kind; on the contrary, I always 
found it relieved, and made them more cheerful 
and easy. Again, how frequently do people at sea 
go through that operation several times a day for 
weeks together without any bad consequences from 
the operation itself? And even hectic people, and 
others who have been to all appearance at the last 
gasp, and given over by their physician, by making 
a sea voyage have been effectually relieved by that 
operation, and returned home, to the astonishment 
of all that knew them, perfectly sound and hearty; 
and yet notwithstanding all these evident proofs be- 
fore their eyes, most people are terrisied at taking an 
emetic. 

As the greatest inconveniency which attends this 
operation (particularly in costive habits) arises from 
wind pent up in the bowels, which sometimes occa- 
sion griping pains therein during the action of an 
emetic; that might in a great measure, if not alto- 
gether, be prevented by administering the following 
or some such clyster previous to taking any thing of 
the emetic kind, viz. Take about half a pint of 
gruel or broth of any kind, a table spoonful of 
common salt, three large spoonsuls of vinegar, and 
as much of oil, mixed, makes one for a grown per- 
son. In short, wind being, from that necessary de- 
|P_15
licacy observed in society, often kept back when 
nature is disposed to discharge it, lays the foundation 
of innumerable tormenting complaints; the wind so 
restrained I have frequently, when sitting in com- 
pany, heard rumbling for a considerable time in the 
bowels of a person several seats from me. And once 
travelling in a stage coach, (from Stamford to Lon- 
don) a poor woman therein, from a circumstance of 
this sort, was greatly embarrassed and put to the 
blush from the tittering of two unfeeling young men 
(farmers to appearance) fellow travellers: she soon 
after grew pale, and was about to faint when I 
stopped the coach, and got her out in the air; upon 
which she fell into a strong hysteric fit, that held 
above half an hour, in the course of which she ex- 
pelled an immense deal of wind both upwards, &c., 
which contributed to her recovery. I mention this 
just to prove how little a matter will put the boasted 
human machine out of sorts, and to reprobate the 
unfeeling conduct of such as can enjoy a laugh at 
the painful misfortunes of their fellow creatures, 
particularly of that sex who command our most hu- 
mane and affectionate attention, being, from the pe- 
culiar restraint their modesty lays them under, liable 
to many inconveniences which men are not. 

In the year 1770 the following extraordinary case 
occurred at Mahon, in the island of Minorca: — 
William Kearns, a soldier of the Old Buffs, was 
sitting on a stone seat by the guard-room door, be- 
tween the hours of nine and ten at night, with se- 
|P_16
veral others of the guard. His comrade, on passing 
by him to the guard room, in play, put himself in 
a boxing attitude, saying, "Have at you, Kearns; 
I can lick you now. " Upon which Kearns threw 
his head back suddenly against the wall, the dis- 
tance about six inches, which made him call out, 
seemingly dipleased, "Damn you, messmate, that's 
no joke—I believe you have made me break my 
sconce. " Then taking off his hat, he rubbed 
the back of his head with his hand, saying, "I 
will be up with you for this. " The other ran 
laughing into the guard room.—Kearns continued 
afterwards above half an hour sitting at the door, 
talking as usual to the other men, without appearing 
the least indisposed, or saying any thing more about 
his head. He then went in and laid down on the 
guard bed. At twelve o'clock, being to go sentinel, 
and not turning out with the relief, the corporal, 
thinking he was asleep, went in to rouse him, and 
sound him lying on his side foaming at the mouth, 
speechless, and his eyes wide open. The corporal 
then called to some of the men to come and see him, 
and they tried to raise him up; upon which he 
fetched a deep groan and expired. One of the men 
ran to Mr. Duffy, surgeon to the 67th regiment, who 
lived almost opposite the guard house, and another 
to me, about half a mile distant. Mr. Duffy went 
to him immediately, and opened the temple artery; 
but it was too late—he was dead. Upon my arrival 
soon after I learnt the preceding account. We then 
out off his hair, and carefully examined the head 
|P_17
and every part, but could not perceive the smallest 
external injury whatsoever, except a very slight ex- 
travasation of blood behind the left ear, the side he 
lay on the guard bed. About one o'clock that day 
I opened the head of the deceased in presence of 
Dr. Monro, physician to the garrison, Mr. Duffy, 
and anoher surgeon; when we found about two 
ounces (not more) of coagulated blood on the right 
anterior hemisphere of the brain, which appeared 
to have issued from a vessel of the dura mater; 
every other part of the membranes, brain, ventri- 
cles, &c., &c., were in as sound and perfect a state 
as possible; the head was uncommonly full of brain, 
and the scull remarkably thin, and in many places 
quite diaphanous. 

Dr. Monro immediately waited on General John- 
ston, the Governor of the Island, to report his own 
and our opinion of this case; and Mr. Duffy and I 
proceeded to open the body, not in expectation of 
finding any thing farther relative to the cause of this 
man's death, but from a custom I always followed 
of opening the body of every soldier that died. Upon 
raising the breast bone a very uncommon fulness ap- 
peared on the left side about the heart, and on divi- 
ding the pericardium a great quantity of very fetid 
wind issued forth, and about four table spoonfuls of 
clear lymph. The heart of this man (who was a 
very stout, well-made soldier, thirty-two years of 
age, and about five feet eight inches high) was un- 
commonly small indeed, (weighing only fifteen 
|P_18
ounces five drams Troy) and looked as if it had 
been parboiled. The lungs, liver, stomach, and 
all the other entrails, were in as sound and perfect a 
state as possible, and in every other respect formed 
as much for longevity as any I ever saw in my life. 
I have been the more particular in stating all the 
circumstances of this case from the supposed cause 
of his death, and the very extraordinary contents of the 
pericardium and state of the heart, leaving the deci- 
sion of the real cause of this man's death to those 
whose superior skill and microscopic discernment 
may enable them to give a better solution to it than 
I chuse to risk my opinion in giving; at the same 
time to shew that windy complaints are (what I have al- 
ready said of them) numerous, wonderful, and often 
puzzling, and therefore how necessary it is that all 
dead bodies should be opened for information sake, 
since the dead cannot be injured, and the living may 
benefit by it.—This case I have singled out from 
several others which I have in my possession relative 
to windy tumours discovered by dissection. I beg 
leave to add, that this man had once or twice been 
troubled with a slight asthmatic complaint; but in 
every other respect was as healthy, to all appearance, 
as any soldier in the regiment. 

To return again to the subject of emetics. 

Some time ago I was called to a gentleman, a 
very free liver, and an extraordinary hard drinker, 
who I make no doubt had a hundred times in his 
life vomited most severely from inebriety, infinitely 
|P_19
more so than he would have done from any common 
emetic given by the faculty; notwithstanding which, 
upon my proposing a vomit for him, which his 
situation absolutely required, he immediately held 
up his hands, begging for God's sake he might not 
take an emetic; that he was too weak; that it would 
strain him to pieces and kill him. He, however, 
got an emetic, and obtained the wanted relief.—I 
say again, that, after all these incontrovertible ex- 
amples, it seems to me most strange that a rational 
being should be so much afraid of this operation, 
when many of the brute part of the creation (that 
feed carnivorously) take such things as instinct di- 
rects them to in order to discharge the offending 
contents of their stomach that way; and I have seen 
a hawk disgorge the contents of his craw: but I 
believe no person ever saw an ox, or an ass, a goat, 
or gander, vomit, of course nature never intended 
it. 

Here, by the by, though foreign to the subject of 
these leaves, permit me, however, to offer a hint 
about the treatment of horses, which noble animal 
I am clearly of opinion has been often tortured, if 
not killed, by having things of the emetic kind ad- 
ministered, since a horse can no more vomit than an 
ass, though I once heard a gentleman declare that he 
saw a dead horse vomit after having Dr. James's 
powders given him when alive; but as this is a mat- 
ter I may perhaps treat more at large on some future 
day, I shall close it here, only adding, that I am sa- 
|P_20
tisfied from all I have seen and heard that many 
medicines that are used by mankind are totally im- 
proper and highly dangerous for such animals as feed 
granivorously and cannot vomit. But how this er- 
roneous method of treating horses as human beings 
has become the practice could be very easily ac- 
counted for. 

Vomiting is, I must, however, confess, a very 
unpleasant operation; but, believe me, it is a much 
more speedy and effectual method of relieving the 
stomach of its offending contents than carrying it 
off by the other channel, through all the turnings, 
festoonings, and curvatures of the lower bowels, in 
the cells of which some of the feces will frequently 
stick and lodge for weeks, nay months together, 
forming that nidus of mischief I have before men- 
tioned, of which the following is a case in point:— 
A soldier of the third regiment of foot (in which I 
served several years) was seized with a cholic in the 
latter end of September, 1771, at Exeter, where 
we were at that time quartered after returning from 
Minorca, which place we left in the month of May 
preceding, and arrived in England the beginning of 
June. As we were in a cyder country, I suspected 
his complaint might arise from drinking that li- 
quor: but he assured me that he had not drank any 
cyder; that he did not like it. However, after ta- 
king a few doses of rhubarb, and some other little 
things, his complaint went off, and he returned to 
his duty; but being a few days after attacked again 
|P_21
with the same disorder in a most violent degree, he 
was taken into the hospital—every thing he took 
came off his stomach immediately, and, in spite of 
every effort, no passage could be procured down- 
wards. Being now exceedingly alarmed for the 
safety of my patient, I directed one of my pills to be 
given every hour until they should operate by stool; 
the two first pills made him rather sick, but did not 
vomit him: after taking six, they began to operate 
downwards, and in one of the discharges he brought 
off a great quantity, near a handful, of grape skins,
highly putrid and offensive. From that hour his 
violent pain went off, and in a week he was perfectly 
recovered. 

Questioning him now about this appearance and 
evident cause of his complaint, I asked if he had eat 
any raisins, either alone or in pudding. He assured 
me he had not taken any thing of the kind since he 
was on ship board; but that on his leaving Minorca 
a friend gave him several pounds of dried grapes by 
way of sea stock; that he eat them all on his passage, 
and from that time had never tasted any thing of the 
kind. He remembered, he said, that the grapes 
griped him often in the same place as when he first 
applied to me, but not so much as to occasion an ap- 
plication then, as the pain generally went off with a 
motion, and he thought they did him good. How- 
ever, it is very clear that a part of this trash remain- 
ed in his body near four months. Besides this, se- 
|P_22
veral other similar cases have occurred to me in the 
course of practice. 

Gouty habits, and all those who live freely either 
in eating or drinking, (for the reasons already stated 
concerning the stomach and bowels) will find this a 
sovereign remedy for the sudden and violent attacks 
which such are often subject to. 

Perhaps it will be asked how can any one medicine 
be good for so many different complaints as the au- 
thor has mentioned? To which I answer, BECAUSE 
IT IS AN ALTERATIVE! By which it is meant, 
that all such offending humours in the body as nature
is not able of herself to throw off, are, by means 
of this medicine, so changed, disposed, and rendered 
capable of expulsion by the proper channels or out- 
lets, as to assist her efforts in removing them effec- 
tually.—And now I beg leave, in turn, to ask of all 
those good folks who strain at a gnat and swallow a 
camel, how it happens that antimony, bark, mer- 
cury, and even several insignificant and other medi- 
cines which I could mention, are made use of by all 
and every physician and medical practitioner as ge- 
neral remedies for almost every disease that falls under 
their cognizance? And lastly, though often too late, 
why the patient is recommended to that universal re- 
medy, Bath water, &c., when the doctor can do no 
more for him? 

|P_23
I shall not, however, presume to impose so far 
upon the understanding of the Public as to endea- 
vour to maintain that my pills are an infallible reme- 
dy for all the diseases to which human nature is in- 
cident: but thus much I venture positively and 
boldly to assert, that I do not believe it is in the 
power of chemical or medical art to compose a bet- 
ter medicine, a milder and more COMPLETE 
ALTERATIVE out of the drugs, &c. in present 
use. But what future time may produce I cannot 
pretend to say. 

Surgeons of the army and navy, (without dero- 
gating from their abilities) by providing themselves 
with these pills, would have a remedy immediately 
at hand, (which their situations sometimes will not 
admit them to get seasonably prepared) by which 
means many valuable lives might be saved, and 
themselves spared much trouble and expence; but 
particularly masters of merchant ships, who have no 
medical assistance, (more especially such as visit warm 
climates, where bilious complaints are most preva- 
lent) and also those who live in the country remote 
from such aid, would find The poor Man's Medicine 
Chest (what I have justly termed it) a most invalua- 
ble remedy. 

Here it may not be improper to give a little ad- 
vice to those also who visit Margate and other water- 
ing places, in the season, for the benefit of their 
healths, from whence many return worse than they 
|P_24
went, and numbers lose their lives from injudicious 
bathing. Though I am convinced from experience 
that the use of the cold bath, when properly ap- 
plied, is of the highest importance towards pre- 
serving of health, yet it should never be had re- 
course to until the body is first properly prepared, 
not by a few doses of salt water, as is usually the 
case, which slips quickly through the bowels, lea- 
ving behind the long-retained feces, &c., which I 
have so pointedly described, possessing no powers to act 
upon them effectually: for give me leave to ac- 
quaint those who think that one thing that opens 
the body is as good as another, that they are most 
egregiously mistaken, for, in fact, there is as much 
difference between one purgative and another as be- 
tween wine and water; for though both of these 
will allay thirst, yet they will not equally exhilerate 
the spirits and produce intoxication. Permit me, 
therefore, most humbly to recommend to all such as 
visit those places, for their health's sake, previously 
to prepare themselves for a fortnight or three weeks 
with my pills, agreeable to the alterative course laid 
down in page 10, convinced they will find their 
advantage in so doing. Afterwards, I have no objec- 
tion to their drinking occasionally a dose of salt 
water, if they like it, to keep the body gently open, 
being perfectly proper the body should be so kept 
during a course of bathing. 

There is one hint more, and that of no small im- 
portance, which I shall presume to offer to bathers, 
|P_25
which is to live temperately and regularly whilst they 
are seeking relief from the bath, and not go into it 
hissing hot, like an iron out of a smith's forge 
plunged into his trough, after sitting up all night, 
and partaking most unmercifully of all the luxuries 
of the season; which misconduct I am fully per- 
suaded has brought numbers to an untimely grave! 

I could offer some other useful remarks upon this 
subject; but as it would extend this little work 
beyond the limits proposed, I shall reserve them for 
another place. For the same reason I shall also 
omit many respectable and well-authenticated vou- 
chers, which I have in my possession, of the won- 
derful effects my pills have already produced; but 
indeed I could rather wish they should establish 
themselves by their future good works, than endea- 
vour to support them by anterior authorities. 

Before I conclude, I think it a duty I owe the 
Public, as well as myself, to make a remark or two 
more; and although it is neither my talent nor wish 
to depreciate the productions of others with a view 
to enhance the value of my own, yet it is but jus- 
tice to draw a fair line between mine and some of 
the pills which are at present in much-esteemed use, 
not doubting at the same time but such are justly 
entitled to the approbation they have obtained from 
the benefit those who used them have experienced, 
and who think themselves, no doubt, as much in- 
debted to them for such relief as they would have 
|P_26
been to the prescriptions of the late Sir Richard 
Jebb, or any great physician of the present day, of 
the ingredients of whose prescriptions they had no 
more knowledge than of those that constituted such 
pills; and therefore I humbly presume it is of very 
little consequence to the party who is so relieved, 
whether obtained from Sir Jeffery Dunstan, Mayor 
of Garratt, or the Vicar of Bray! But as one 
watch excels another in regulating time, so may one 
medicine surpass another in momentous essicacy. 
Many of those pills, then, which I shall forbear to 
call by name, lest I should incur the appellation of 
being envious, and increase the number of my op- 
ponents, being only calculated to act merely as a 
purgative, can by no means come in competition with
what I have asserted (and on which I pledge my re- 
putation) mine will be sound to persorm; conse- 
quently a medicine of this sort has long been want- 
ing. Therefore, without entertaining an iota of 
doubt but I shall in due time receive from a generous 
Public the approbation I seek for the offering made,
I shall now conclude with an old but just proverb — 

— Siquid novisti reslius islis, Candidus imperti: si 
non, his utere me#um. 
☞ Having entitled my box of pills The poor 
Man's Medicine Chest! it remains for me to main- 
tain that appellation. These pills, then, are put up 
in boxes at four shillings and six pence, and ton 
shillings and six pence, slamps included. The small 
|P_27
box contains forty-eight pills, or twelve large doses. 
Now as a common dose is but three, and some re- 
quire only two pills, it will often happen that this 
box may contain twenty doses; and whoever is 
obliged to have recourse to an apothecary for an 
equal number of doses of medicine would have at 
least twenty shillings to pay, exclusive of some con- 
sideration for his trouble and attendance, and per- 
haps not receive as much benefit from the whole as 
from one dose of these pills. The large box con- 
tains one hundred and twenty pills, or thirty large 
doses. 

For the present, the pills will be sold by the 
Proprietor only, at his Patent Baume of Arquebu- 
sade Warehouse, No. 13, Leicester Street, Leicester 
Square; (the use of which Baume has been found, 
as will appear by the annexed letters, of the highest 
importance); but as soon as proper persons are ap- 
pointed to vend them, their names will be affixed to 
this publication; and the better to prevent imposi- 
tions, each box is sealed with his coat of arms — 
Motto, Confido in Deo!

The Public are requested to pay strict attention to 
these circumstances, since there are a number of 
medicasters and other piratical wretches ever ready 
to obtrude on the world their own dangerous imita- 
tions for the works of others, (preying like the 
hornet on the honey of the industrious bee) under a 
pretence of being able to analyse, without knowing 
|P_28
the nature of that arduous and nice process, and 
many of those pretenders not even the meaning of 
the word; by which means a most valuable medi- 
cine loses its reputation, and the Public are de- 
ceived. 

|P_
[}LETTERS. }]
[}THE BAUME }]
[}Was first made public in February, 1786, since which 
Time the following are a Part of upwards of a hun- 
dred Letters addressed to the Patentee, (Originals of 
which are now in his Possession) by those who have 
experienced its happy Effects. }]
Facts are stubborn things which speak for themselves. 
SIR, 
Woolwich,Aug. 11, 1786. 

I SHOULD think myself lost to all sense of gra- 
titude if I did not acknowledge that, under God, 
you have been the saver of my life by the use of 
your Baume d'Arquebusade; and I am now happy in 
acquainting you that all those violent pains in my 
stomach and bowels, as well as my loins and kidnies, 
|P_30
disagreeable belchings, cold clammy sweats, cos- 
tiveness, sloppage of urine, restless nights, &c., &c., 
occasioned by a bilious complaint which I contracted 
in America, have all entirely left me, and I am now, 
thank God, in perfect health. — For the first ten 
or twelve days I took the Baume I thought myself 
worse, and left it off; but at your particular re- 
quest I began to use it again, and in about a week 
found myself better, and began to void gravel of a 
hard red substance, which I continued voiding, 
more or less, every day for upwards of two months; 
sometimes found the quantity of a tea-spoonsul of 
this gravel in my pot of a morning. Indeed when I 
took to the Baume a second time I had little or no 
hopes of myself, (whatever you might have) ha- 
ving been under the care of one or other of the fa- 
culty for upwards of three years, and could get no 
relief until I applied to you. In humanity to my 
fellow creatures I should wish this letter to be made 
public; but that as you please — 

And am, 
With true heart-selt gratitude, Sir, 
Yours, &c. 
BASIL, CUNNINGHAM, 
Lieut. Royal Artillery. 

|P_31
SIR, 
No. 7, Boston Row, Brompton,
Sept. 16, 1787. 

I BEG leave to express my gratitude, as an in- 
dividual, for the obligation you have conserred on 
mankind by the discovery of your Baume d'Arque- 
busade, and also to inform you of the benefit I have 
derived from it. I had been afflicted three years 
with a violent bilious complaint, attended with con- 
stant severs, lowness of spirits, violent head-achs, 
&c., &c. I applied to several of the most eminent 
of the faculty, and took all the medicines which 
were recommended: went twice to Bath for the be- 
nesit of the waters; the first time of using them 
found myself much worse, as they increased my 
fever, head-ach, &c.; the second time they had 
little or no effect. I at length despaired of a re- 
medy, and thought all I could hope was to prevent 
the complaint's increasing by a strict regard to diet, 
when I heard of the wonderful effects of your Baume 
d'Arquebusade, and resolved to try it. At first it 
would not stay on my stomach, and occasioned saint- 
ness and burning sensation in my throat: though I 
was rather discouraged by those unpleasant effects, I 
however determined to give it a fair trial, and by 
the time I had sinished the first bottle these effects 
ceased, and I began to find benefit. In about three 
months I became perfectly free from all complaints, 
and have ever since enjoyed a confirmed state of 
health.—I have no objection to your publishing this 
letter, if you think proper; and am ready to an- 
|P_32
swer, in person, to any who may wish to question 
me upon the subject. 

I am, Sir, 
Your obliged, humble servant, 
MARY HALCOT. 

{inverted ⁂} This lady has since been married, and has 
had two fine children, of both which I delivered 
her. 

[}The following Extract of a Letter from a respectable 
Merchant at Plymouth, dated Plymouth, June 9, 
1787.}]
"I CANNOT conclude my letter without ren- 
dering your merit the tribute of praise so justly due 
for presenting to mankind that most excellent medi- 
cine, the concentrated Balsam of Arquebusade, which, 
by having taken a sew bottles, has relieved me from 
a very dangerous bilious complaint, and for which 
I tried the Bath waters last summer, upwards of six 
weeks, in vain, after having previously been under 
the care of a very eminent physician a considerable 
time.—If this declaration of mine can be of any ser- 
vice to you, you have sull permission to shew it to all 
asslicted with that dreadful disorder, from which I 
have been so happily relieved. But I could wish you 
|P_33
not to publish in the newspapers my name, as a refe- 
rence to yourself for a sight of this declaration must 
answer every purpose.—Lieut. Scott, of the Royal 
Navy, hath also, to my knowledge, been entirely 
cured of a violent bilious disorder by your medi- 
cine, and been free from any return for upwards of 
eight months." 

[}Extract of a Letter from a most respectable Planter 
in the Island of Nevis, dated Nevis, October 4, 
1787.}]
"YOUR Arquebusade Concentre is of the utmost 
use to us. I have never yet applied it inwardly; but 
in bruises, sprains, severe cuts, and rheumntic com- 
plaints, it has never failed. One negro, who chopped 
half his finger off at the joint, had his wound healed 
by it as if it had been by magic: another, whose 
leg was violently tore by a dog, equally so. My 
Overseer's foot was jammed by a cart, and it cured 
him in a sew days. We use it for all sores in ne- 
groes legs, and it never fails. From this you may 
guess that my provision thereof is much diminished; 
therefore beg you will send me double the quantity I 
had the last year. Out of what I have I shall, how- 
ever, give Mr. Walter Nesbit and Mr. J. Taylor a 
little for a trial: they are two of our first planters 
here; and on your account, as well as theirs, I am 
sorry I did not do it sooner. 

|P_34
"P. S. You are perfectly welcome to make any 
use you please of the paragragh about your Arque- 
busade Balsam, for what I have said is true, so help 
me, &c. 

G. FORBES." 

SIR, 
Portugal Street, Grosvenor Square,
January 19, 1788. 

HAVING received so much benefit from your 
much-esteemed and valuable Balsam, I should be 
glad if you would have my case inserted in the pub- 
lic papers, both for your credit and the good of the 
Public at large.—I received about two months ago 
a very violent stroke from a horse on my kneepan, 
and was so very bad that all who saw me expected I 
must lose my leg at least — I was advised to apply to 
you—you gave me a few bottles of your Balsam, by 
the use of which, in a few days, I was much re- 
lieved, and in three weeks time got perfectly sound 
and well, to the great astonishment of all our fa- 
mily, and of all who had seen my knee; so your 
publishing this will greatly oblige, 

Sir, your humble servant, 
GEORGE WALKER, 
Servant to Capt. Scott, Equerry 
to His Royal Highness the 
Prince of Wales. 

|P_35
SIR, 

HAVING, by repeated trials, experienced the 
good effects of your excellent Baume d'Arquebusade,
which entirely cured me of a violent dropsical com- 
plaint that threatened the most serious consequences, 
I think it but justice in me to avow it. I have also 
the pleasure to inform you of a remarkable cure it 
lately performed upon one of my servants in the 
country, who had the misfortune to tear her arm by 
falling upon a rusty spike, (where she hung for some 
time) which made a hole as large and half as deep as 
my finger: I immediately filled the wound with the 
Baume, and after dressing it with the Baume a few 
days had the satisfaction to see her arm perfectly 
healed, and she could do her work as usual. 

I am, &c. 
MARY ELFORD. 

Hollyport, Berks,
December 4, 1789. 

SIR, 

WE have a number of people ill in this neigh- 
bourhood, particularly of sore throats. I have found 
your Baume d'Arquebusade to be more efficacious 
than any other medicine, it having given almost im- 
mediate relief, and only from an outward applica- 
tion. Great numbers have died of this virulent sore 
|P_36
throat; but I hope the timely application of this 
useful medicine may, through the blessing of God, 
prevent its direful effects. — Beg you will imme- 
diately send by the Boston Coach six bottles, at 
6s. 10d. per bottle, and write upon the direction to 
come in the inside of the coach. 

I am, Sir, 
Yours, &c. 
RICHARD BRACKENBURY. 

Raithby Hall, near Spilsby, Lincolnshire,
November 12, 1788. 

☞ This incomparable antiseptic, chemical Bal- 
sam is prepared from the concentrated juices of 
the most salatiferous, aromatic, saponaceous roots, 
plants, &c., and is of so pervading a nature, that it 
enters speedily into the system when rubbed upon 
the surface of the body, gradually opens the ob- 
structed capillary vessels, and passes through the 
whole course of circulation: its happy effects ha- 
ving exceeded the Patentee's ablest panegyric in the 
following cases, viz. violent sprains, bruises, frac- 
tures, gun-shot and all kinds of wounds, cuts, old 
obstinate ulcers, and swellings of the joints and 
other parts, scalds, burns, chilblains, &c.; for all 
of which, as well as for its internal use, a bill of 
directions is given with each bottle. 

THE END. 
