
|P_
[}INTRODUCTION. }]
INNUMERABLE are the agents which disturb 
our health, and make us liable to a wonderful 
variety of disorders and diseases; and it has ever 
been the business of the good Physician to exert 
his application, study, and diligence, in propor- 
tion to their danger and malignancy—Physicians, 
I say, whose lives are occupied in destroying the 
existing causes of the different maladies to which 
we are subject, and of re-establishing the good 
order of the animal economy, are certainly the 
most noble portion of society, the most useful, 
and (as Cicero has expressed himself) "Who 
nearest approach the Divinity." 

Cutaneous Eruptions, although an affection so 
very general, an affection, common to all ages, 
all constitutions, all cities and countries, have, 
from the enlightened, received little more than 
mere theoretical discussion; and thus, unhappily 
they are not even yet, advanced a long way in 
this branch of their art. 

|P_4
The only reason of their not having made 
progress in this part of the science, arises from 
an error, which, till lately, was universally adopt- 
ed concerning the ORIGIN of these diseases. 

Every one seemed sure that a vice did exist in 
the blood, which when carried to the surface of 
the body, produced the different morbific appear- 
ances: and each, as vainly endeavoured to deter- 
mine the CHARACTER and QUALITIES of 
this imaginary vice; their labours were necessa- 
rily abortive, and, as will ever be the case 
where the criterion cannot be found, a variety 
of opinions necessarily arose. 

From these erroneous and false principles they 
deduced their medical indications, or, in other 
terms, their method of cure; and these methods 
were not unique, but as numerous and as diffe- 
rent, as had been their particular opinions: con- 
sequently, by pursuing the FALSE, the true means 
were neglected. This accounts for their back- 
wardness and universal want of success in these 
complaints. 

The case is now different; I say different, be- 
cause in those latter times Physicians have known, 
that the diseases of the skin, are a local affection, 
produced by a depraved and altered secretion 
of the extreme arterial vessels, or, the cutaneous 
glands, which are in a preternatural state: 
consequently, this knowledge has led them to 
|P_5
attempt the cure, with topical, or external medi- 
cines. The effects have often corresponded with 
their expectation; but often also, their expecta- 
tions have been frustrated, for want of a SPE- 
CIFIC REMEDY. 

Experience only could bring forward this spe- 
cific, which Physicians, by simple reasoning alone, 
never could discover. 

As all new doctrines in medicine amount to an 
impeachment of, and directly militate against, the 
judgment and practice of the day in which they 
are proposed; they have therefore, not only men's 
prejudices to encounter, but also their pride; 
and frequently, nothing but the determination of 
the patients themselvs can make their adoption 
general: this was particularly instanced in the in- 
troduction of the Bark, Inoculation, &c. &c. 

The situation of Mr. Gowland, as Apothecary 
to the Three Royal Households, was particularly 
favourable, and gave more frequent occasion to 
his experience in the complaints of which we are 
about to speak, than most others; and he lau- 
dably availed himself at an early stage of this 
doctrine, with that alertness, and observation, 
which eventually produced the specific in ques- 
tion. 

He had observed the treatment employed on 
Miss Chudleigh, by the Physicians under whose 
care she was, and the inefficacy, with which it was 
|P_6
attended; and although his Lotion was not admi- 
nistered, until their efforts had failed of success, 
its wonderful effects went beyond his own, 
or even his patient's hopes [/1./]. This fact alone, 
was not sufficient to canonize the Lotion and en- 
sure to it the reputation of SPECIFIC: but a 
long use, a scrutinizing and judicious observa- 
tion, was further necessary. The fact, how- 
ever, being known, a great number of afflicted 
persons, the more readily concurred to try the 
remedy. This afforded him the opportunity of 
verifying and establishing, the vast power of his 
Lotion, and at the same time, was the most 
complete defence of his doctrine and his repu- 
tation, against the invidious attacks of those in- 
terested men of his time, whose practice it so di- 
rectly militated against. 

This happy discovery of Mr. Gowland's has 
been much more interesting, and more useful to 
mankind, than all the volumes written to this day 
upon Eruptions of the Skin, as they contain no- 
thing but Theories, and have always been defec- 
tive in the most essential part, namely, the man- 
ner of curing, &c. 

It is not enough to speak well upon diseases; 
the thing more important is to relieve them. 

|P_7
This recalls to my recollection, the history of 
those two Greek sculptors, who were called by the 
Senate, in order to learn from them, how they 
would execute a statue which might be allusive 
to an hero of Greece, and erect it to his glory. 
One of them made a long discourse, which showed 
him to have an exquisite taste, and proved, that he 
was completely master, at least of the theory of his 
art: as he finished, the opinion of the other was 
required; he answered in a few words, "I will do
what my colleague has said;" and he was chosen 
by the Senate, because they desired the work, 
and not a dissertation upon the work. 

I have no doubt that many Physicians have 
spoken with more elegance and eloquence, upon 
the impurities of the skin than Mr. Gowland has 
done—but Mr. Gowland relieved his pa- 
tients. 

Nor is this the only advantage enjoyed by 
him; it will appear, by this essay, that he was ac- 
quainted with the true causes of this disease. 

The many reasons and proofs, which both de- 
monstrate his knowledge, and the truth of the 
doctrine, have received additional weight, from 
having since appeared, in the works of the most 
enlightened Physicians of the present day, and 
which prove incontrovertibly, that the cutaneous 
affections are mere local affections. 

It is to be lamented that medical works are 
|P_8
chiefly confined to the readings of medical men; 
and of course, however indispensable and whole- 
some, the doctrine may be, are therefore never 
thoroughly disseminated, especially, when re- 
pugnant to the general consumption of medi- 
cine. How far that has been the case in what 
has formerly been written on this subject, is left 
to the discernment of the reader. This remark, 
however, may be made, that, the use of a Topical 
Remedy, in cutaneous diseases, must entirely su- 
persede the use of internal medicine for these 
complaints; from its pleasantness, ease, and cer- 
tainty of cure. Hence some opposition may be 
expected from the selfish as well as the ignorant: 
characters unhappily too common, even in this 
profession—characters, on whom the remark of 
CICERO should be reversed [/2./]. 

|P_9
In the course of this essay the term secre- 
tion is of necessity often used:—on a thorough 
knowledge, and indeed, intimate acquaintance 
with this term, and the exact meaning of it in its 
fullest extent, depends all the information the 
reader can gain; and in proportion to his ac- 
quaintance therewith, will be his information, 
and acquaintance with the subject. 

By the term secretion people generally under- 
stand no more than certain secreted fluids, or mat- 
ters; without considering at all, the organs that 
produce them, or the power of those organs, to 
alter their properties, from a natural state, and 
according to the circumstances, impress them 
with new characters, and frequently characters 
of disease. 

By the term secretion, physiologists under- 
stand a particular operation, performed by the 
extremities of arterial vessels, from which results 
a new animal product, or in other terms, a fluid 
which is furnished with new characters and pro- 
perties, ("sui generis") and of their own distinct 
kind: for instance, the bile is elaborated in the 
liver, and is not in the blood, nor are its cha- 
racters to be found in any other part of the hu- 
man body. Again, the fat is not in the blood, 
|P_10
but the arteries, which terminate in the cellular 
membrane, elaborate and compose it by a secret 
and inimitable combination of principles: the 
poison of vipers is not found in the mass of their 
fluids, (on the contrary they are very innocent) 
but it is created by particular organs endowed 
with that power. 

The same observation applies to all the secre- 
tions, particularly that which takes place and is 
performed in the skin, or surface of the body, 
called perspiration. 

These operations are themselves very surpris- 
ing and difficult to be understood, it is however, 
enough to know the effects, and these effects are, 
as has been observed, generally, of their own pro- 
per and natural kind. 

Nor is this doctrine confined to animals alone, 
it is the same in greens, plants, and flowers them- 
selves; their different colours, smell, taste, &c. 
are from a specific combination of parts, the con- 
sequence of different secretions. 

Since then the earth, from which they have 
their nourishment, has not in itself, all the dif- 
ferent principles, qualities, salts, and juices, which 
they themselves possess, so it is necessary to al- 
low, that this combination, is the result of the ves- 
sels of those vegetables, adapted to an inherent 
power in them, the same as the secretions of ani- 
mals: and if it is absurd to assert (as it certainly 
|P_11
is) that these different products and matters exist 
READY PERFORMED in the earth; so it should be 
equally absurd to think that the different secreted 
fluids in animals exist ready performed, or 
that their characters, are in the blood. 

In the perusal of this little work, the intelli- 
gent reader, it is presumed, will find reasoning 
and fact founded on reflection and experiment, 
agreeing with the truest principles of the art, and 
not on simple speculation: nor is it doubted but 
the truth and candour of Mr. Gowland's Essay 
will entitle his Specific to that confidence which 
the experience of fifty years, and the testimony 
of thousands, in the first ranks of society, have 
proved it to deserve. 

That the following Pages had been intended for Pub- 
lication by Mr. Gowland in his life-time, is evident:— 
why it did not take place, we are at a loss to surmise. They 
were found among other MS. papers after his death, and 
have been submitted in that manuscript to a Gentleman, 
who, from his philanthropy and medical talents, is an orna- 
ment and a blessing to the Country in which he lives. The 
truth of the doctrine, he declared was such, and withal so 
little known, that he should regret extremely if it was with- 
held. This observation determined the present Proprietors 
of his specific, on its publication, and they conceive they are 
doing no more than their duty, to the public, and to them- 
selves, in demonstrating also, that this remedy has not suf- 
fered any diminution, or lost any of its virtues, in its mission 
from the inventor's hand to their's; in proof of which, they 
here adduce the following general testimony: 

|P_12
[}CERTIFICATE
OF THE EFFICACY OF THE GENUINE 
GOWLAND's LOTION, 
PREPARED BY
ROBERT DICKINSON,
UNDER THE INSPECTION OF HIS FATHER-IN-LAW, 
THOMAS VINCENT.}]
We whose names are hereunto subscribed, being well satisfied that the 
use of the Genuine Gowland's Lotion is calculated, and adequate to cure 
the most violent eruptions of the face, &c. and also to cleanse and clear 
the skin in general, We seel, as if promoting a general benefit, in permit- 
ting the Proprietors, to refer any person to us who may desire such satis- 
faction, and also, in authorising them thus publicly to use our names. 

A. Cruger, son to the Member of Parliament for Bristol.
Tho. Mayer,of Queen-square, Westminster, and Malton, in 
Yorkshire.
Richard Bethel cox,Craig's-court, Charing-cross.
Tho. Holloway, Chancery-lane.
Peter Crawford, York House, Albemarl-street.
James Baily, York House, Albemarl-street.
James Fozard, Park-lane,
Alex. Weatherley, Crown-and-scepter-court, St. James's. 
street.
Francis Underwood, No. 228, High Holborn.
A letter from Mrs. Jane Fountain, of High-street, Mary- 
le-bone, has in it also this very remarkable passage: 

I have recommended the Lotion for upwards of thirty years to all 
my female acquaintance, as a general cleanser and clearer of the skin, and 
have as constantly received the thanks of those who have used it. 

Mrs. Patterson Anstruther, of Ely House, Fifeshire, and 
sister-in-law to the Member of Parliament, has savoured the 
Proprietors with this very expressive declaration: 

I have found it a great cleanser, and clearer of the skin, though at first 
it occasioned rather an alarming scurf. 
A. P. W. ANSTRUTHER. 

The respectability of those testimonies is such as must su- 
persede the necessity of all further remark. 

|P_
[}PRELIMINARY 
OBSERVATIONS. }]
AMONG the Chronical Diseases, the Eruption 
of the Skin is one affection, the most common, 
and, at the same time the least dangerous: it is 
not preceded by any causes, capable of inducing 
a disorder in the animal economy, and those who 
are thus afflicted always enjoy the best state of 
health. This excludes the idea of that humoral 
vice, to which some Physicians, ascribe every 
disorder, when the cause thereof is unknown to 
them. Some learned English Physicians, how- 
ever, of the present day, have taken away the 
veil to this species of imposture, and have brought 
to light the vacuum that did exist in the hy- 
pothesis of humours; and yet, notwithstanding 
their efforts, the same prejudices nevertheless 
exist, and indeed, are almost general, from their 
works having been chiefly confined to the read- 
ing of medical men. The humourists have ne- 
ver been able to support their opinion beyond 
the most simple conjecture, the strongest of which 
is, that the work of Chylification and Sanguifica- 
tion, or of Chyle and Blood, is often ill perform- 
|P_14
ed, and consequently the fluids remove more or 
less from their natural state. One might answer 
these gentlemen, that if the aliments are not all 
converted into chyle, the lymphatics or lacteal 
vessels of the intestines do not absorb the remain- 
der, and that they refuse admission to all matters 
which have either an acid or alkaline quality; 
that is, these vessels have a power of attracting 
what is proper for them, and of repelling what 
is not: thus their mouths become shut the instant 
their outer extremities are approached by these 
substances, and except to some violent medicines, 
open only to what is neutralised and fit for nu- 
trition. In order to demonstrate this, we need 
but observe, that there are always matters in the 
intestinal canal, which are naturally in a cor- 
rupted state, namely the residium of the chylifi- 
cation or excrements, and which, are refused upon 
the same principle. 

There is also in the intestines a quantity of 
gaz really mixed with the aliments and chyle; 
but this is never absorbed by the lymphatics in 
the pure state of gaz; I say never, because if it 
should happen, immediate death would be the 
certain consequence of such absorption: in fact, 
when this gaz, or ethereal fluid are injected into 
the cellular of the skin, or into the vessels of any 
animal, the most dreadful disorders ensue, and, in 
general, death itself. This has been demonstrated 
by the experiments of the Abbe Vassalli. And, 
|P_15
as to the sanguification, it is demonstrated, that 
the atmosphere makes this admirable process,— 
changes and converts the fluids into animal sub- 
stances, and renders them proper for nutrition: it 
is for this reason, that in individuals who have a 
bad temperament or constitution, the blood is as 
good, as in the most robust, and healthy. This 
fine and precious observation, is made by Dr. 
Ballonius, the Hyppocrates of France. 

There are also positive vital powers, in the 
life of the animal, which prevent the degenera- 
tion of humours, as is demonstrated by experi- 
ments and facts; from which it results, that the 
circulating fluids, though they are not refreshed 
by new aliments, preserve themselves innocent. 
V. Haller Physiolog:—Tit de fame et Siti, &c. 
And lastly, many organs exist in the animal body, 
which continually purge and purify the mass of 
blood, if by any accident heterogeneous matter 
should intermix therewith: but without stopping 
any longer on this question, I return to my sub- 
ject. 

I have said that the Cutaneous Eruptions do 
not originate by any acrimony of the fluids: 
their proximate cause is an altered secretion,
which takes place in the skin. 

That the perspiration be a secretion, sui gene- 
ris, is a fact which wants no proof, and it would be 
ridiculous to doubt, and question, upon any phy- 
|P_16
siological point so evident as this is. That every
secretion is liable to be changed, and more or 
less altered, by a variety of circumstances, there 
are many instances. Individuals who are sea- 
sick, often bring up a great quantity of bile, 
which is black and corrosive, and is very far 
from being in a natural state. It also happens 
frequently that children when cutting their teeth 
have very fetid Diarrhoea, from the stimulus of 
the gums communicating with the intestines. It 
is an observation of Sydenham, that hysterical 
women sometimes vomit bilious and depraved 
matters, which did not exist before the paroxism 
in the stomach nor in the bowels, but which had 
been separated during the paroxism itself. 

In the same women, as well as in the hy- 
pochondriacal, when afflicted by their mala- 
dies, a very copious quantity of urine is in- 
stantaneously separated, and it is as limpid and 
clear, as spring water. This secretion is the sure, 
or as Physicians say, the pathognomonicon sign 
of this disorder. Sometimes fear alone will sud- 
denly arrest the menstrua; sometimes anger will 
provoke an hemorrhage of the uterus. Grief 
and sorrow constantly occasion a greater secre- 
tion of bile, and this fluid is sometimes so acrid 
as to produce convulsions, or the more dreadful 
effects of melancholy, or pains in the intestines, 
or colick; and if it be by any accident absorbed 
|P_17
and brought into circulation, excites some se- 
rious or fatal disorders. The secretion of the 
milk, by violent pathemata, or passions of the 
mind, has been on several occasions stopped, and 
it often happens that its qualities are changed 
and vitiated: in the last case the child is violently 
purged, or affected with convulsion-fits, and other 
indispositions and disorders. In a word, every 
organ, which nature has destined to perform any 
secretion, is subjected to the influence of the 
nerves, and as a certain consequence receives 
and partakes of all the affections of this system. 

Now nothing is more certain, than that those 
organs, which are supplied with the greatest share 
of sensibility, and which have a more intimate 
connection (let me say) with the nervous system, 
will suffer more than other parts in exact propor- 
tion to the closeness of that connection. I will 
now ask what part in the animal body, has so much 
connection with, or dependence on the nerves, 
as the skin? Certainly none. It is from the in- 
numerable quantity of nerves which are inter- 
spersed throughout, and actually terminate in the 
skin [/3./], that this dependence and connection ex- 
ists, and thus it is that the anxieties, emotions, and 
troubles of the mind,—the morbific state of the vis- 
cera, the tooth-ach, a bad digestion, and a hundred 
|P_18
other causes, are capable of influencing the 
transpiration, and thereby materially affecting the 
health of the skin; besides, that the action of the 
atmosphere must be calculated, and considered, 
as one of the most obvious, and powerful agents. 

The causes last spoken of, do not always act; 
for instance, they do not act when the tone of the 
Cutaneous vessels is above the irritability of the 
muscular fibre; and sometimes, although an im- 
pression be made upon those vessels, nevertheless 
no eruption takes place, because in this case, the 
other secretions are augmented, in the same pro- 
portion, as the cutaneous secretion is diminished: 
This is especially observable in cold weather 
[/4./]. 
Hyppocrates says—Cutis densitas ventris laxitas. It 
is not only by the belly that this compensation of 
secretion is executed, but the Reins are also ano- 
ther Canal, by which the superfluous fluids are 
commonly evacuated. 

Persons of an irritable temper, a great mobi- 
lity, a fine a delicate skin, and a disposition to 
the cutaneous eruptions, suffer very much from 
the humidity and vicissitudes of the air, and every 
kind of irritation. The animal powers in such 
individuals are very often insufficient to prevent 
the disorders in question. 

One reflection ought here to be made; it is, 
|P_19
that a great number of persons are ignorant of 
the cause of their complaint, although it really 
exists in themselves; but where the causes are so 
extremely numerous, it cannot be expected I 
should enumerate them all: yet in order to be 
understood, I shall instance a few facts, and at 
the same time observe, that the effects frequently 
remain, when the primary cause has ceased. 

There are many women, who, in certain deli- 
cate circumstances, are frequently troubled with 
efflorescences, pimples, &c. in their faces, hands, 
legs, &c. but who, not perceiving any sensible 
unusual trouble, or inconvenience, do not im- 
mediately think of the stimulus that exists in the 
internal organs, and are therefore far from con- 
ceiving it to be the cause of the present cuta- 
neous affection. 

A great eater, who vigorously executes all the 
functions of life, and is perfectly well, never sus- 
pects that his stomach is stimulated by the far- 
rago of aliments, with which it is continually as- 
sailed; but seeing the surface of his body covered 
with eruptions, is disposed to attribute them to 
any cause rather than the true one. But there 
is a variety of stimulus, of which our internal 
organs are sensible, that we do not perceive; 
thus, we have no sense of the stimulus excited 
by the blood circulating in the heart, nor of 
that which the juices of the stomach occasion 
|P_20
in its nervous membrane, and which the bile 
and other juices, occasion in the intestines, &c. 
&c. 

If these different stimulus, and many others, 
I do not speak of, are increased, and become 
violent, then not only the proper organ where 
the specific fluids are separated and collected, 
but other parts, are, by sympathy, sensible thereof, 
without any knowledge or consciousness of the 
mind. It is from effects that a knowledge of 
the wonderful laws of the animal economy is 
obtained; and in order to prevent mankind's 
being any longer mistaken, as to the real sources 
of cutaneous eruptions, I have endeavoured 
to explain them the more fully, that they may 
be the better understood. 

I have said, that the sensibility and mobi- 
lity of the arterial vessels are so very great 
[/5./], that they sympathize, extremely, with all the ner- 
vous system, but, particularly with the stomach, 
the intestines, and the womb, &c. and also, of 
the peculiar influence, which, the passions of the 
mind, affecting the nerves, have upon the skin; 
nor, must we forget what is still greater, the action
of the atmosphere, to which the face, particularly, 
is always exposed. Since then, there are so many 
|P_21
agents to disturb the functions of the skin, it is 
not extraordinary to see the surface of the body, 
and particularly the face, so often affected with 
lumps, blotches, pimples, efflorescence, herpeys, 
&c. &c.—indeed, it would be more extraordi- 
nary if it was otherwise. 

The action of stimulus, directed now to one 
part, and now to another, gives occasion to par- 
tial eruption, and the character of this eruption 
differs, according to the nature of the stimulus, 
its duration, and, of the sensibility of the person 
affected. 

These appearances, sometimes, resemble scor- 
butic spots, and the practitioner, not well in- 
structed, often confounds the one with the other, 
but without reason; because the real symptoms 
of scurvy, never attend the affections we are 
speaking of. 

It is truly important to determine the true 
cause of this disorder, for, from hence, one ought 
to deduce the medical indications; and I have 
endeavoured, in my little work, to fix this point, 
assisted by reason, experience, and authority. 

In order then, to demonstrate the severe con- 
sequences which obtain, by a wrong and false 
principle, we need but reflect upon the ordinary 
method of humourists in the case in question; 
they always begin by purging and bleeding, and 
|P_22
so prepare the body to the use of remedies, 
which they call sweeteners and balsamicks. 

This plan is as infamous as their theory, as it 
serves merely to weaken more and more the con- 
stitution, and, from hence, the cutaneous affec- 
tions take a greater extent, and its character be- 
comes more hurtful, severe, and uneasy. Ex- 
perience so fatal ought to teach them to re- 
nounce a practice which is always useless, and 
frequently dangerous. 

Another remark must be made on the method 
of humorists; it is, that they attempt to cure in the 
same manner all the unhappy persons which fall 
into their hands, however various may have been 
the cause. If in their opinion an acrimony does 
exist, it cannot be the same in all individuals; 
nay, it must extremely differ from one another 
from their tempers, constitution, age, customs, and 
passions, and, to be corrected, its nature should 
be known, &c. It is another argument of the 
absurdity of the treatment employed by the hu- 
morists, and is also, equally a proof, that they 
have not an idea, nor just nor false, of the acri- 
mony which they undertake, and pretend to des- 
troy, and, that they exercise the art blindly. 

The good practitioners, instead of occupying 
themselves, to correct an imaginary vice of the 
blood, direct their thoughts to the skin, as there 
is the focus and seat of the disorder. 

|P_23
The qualities of the eruption are not always 
the same, nay, they differ materially, not only 
in different subjects, but also in the same in- 
dividual; for a person may have spots, her- 
peys, blotches, &c. &c. all at the same time, 
which could not happen if the vice was in the 
blood, for then they would be all of the same 
species of eruption, which is not here necessary, 
as it proceeds from an altered secretion, and this 
secretion is not every where the same, but 
changes in different parts in the same body, be- 
cause every part, nay, every point of the body, is 
furnished with its own sensibility, and as the 
physiologists say, "Sua fruntur vita."

It might seem contradictory and paradoxical, 
that we should propose one remedy as the specific 
in all these cases; but it is not so, for we are not
intending by this remedy to attack the bad 
qualities of the matters which occasion the local 
disorder, because we know not their intrinsic na- 
ture; there is another way for us to take that is 
more short, easy, and at the same time sure; it is 
to alter the action of the vessels which prepare it 
improperly,— it is to change the cuta- 
neous secretion, by applying to the ves- 
sels themselves. The small arteries which fil- 
trate the perspirable matter, are affected with 
spasm; I say, with spasm, for I see that the re- 
mote causes of the eruption act upon the skin 
|P_24
as stimulants; and I observe, that, if the stimulus 
be momentary, the eruptions almost always dis- 
appear spontaneously, with swiftness and faci- 
lity. When the stimulus has been of long con- 
tinuation, the spasm continues though the stimu- 
lus has subsided, and exists no more.

From the foregoing reflections, it is easy to 
perceive, that the principal indication in the 
cutaneous affections is to resolve the spasm, 
from which the preternatural secretion depends, 
and to give a bland tone to the cutaneous ves- 
sels. 

The Lotion produces this effect, by calming 
the spasmodic contraction, and restoring the 
tone of the excretories, and the cutaneous ves- 
sels. 

It often happens, that in the first moments, 
the use of the Lotion increases the eruption, be- 
cause the action of the skin becomes more easy 
and natural: this symptom, besides being de- 
monstrative and satisfactory, announces always 
a very quick recovery. 

Generally the recovery is not rapid, but comes 
on slowly, and in proportion as the vessels ap- 
proach their former state, and usual manner of 
acting. 

|P_
[}THE 
ANATOMY OF THE SKIN. }]
[}ITS IMPURITIES, AND THE CAUSES THEREOF. }]
NATURE has been no less bountiful and attentive to the 
structure of the external covering, than to the more noble 
parts of our frame; it is no less remarkable for its general 
use, than for its beauty; it is composed of two parts, viz. the 
epidermis, or scarf-skin, which is the external, and the cu- 
tis, or true skin, which is underneath: the first is inorganic; 
the other is, what anatomists call highly organized, being 
made up of arteries, veins, and nerves, and exquisitely 
formed to convey to the mind, the various impressions we 
receive, which impressions, we call feeling. 

It is beset with many small glands, for separating the per- 
spirable matter, and with others also, which furnish a dif- 
ferent and a more mucilaginous fluid, contained in a fine 
reticular, or network substance, between the outward and 
inward skins, to sheath the nerves from injury, and regu- 
late the sense of feeling, which would, without such pro- 
tection, be too exquisite. The internal surface becomes in- 
sensibly of a less firm texture, and at length degenerates into 
the cellular membrane; a great number of arteries, and still 
greater number of veins, extend themselves within its sub- 
stance; the lymphatics distributed upon it, are also very 
numerous, as well as the nerves, the extremities of which 
evade the observation of the most discerning anatomists. 

|P_26
The scarf, or outward skin, is a very fine transparent 
membrane, in the composition of which, neither vessels or 
fibres are observable; it is, in itself, not endued with a sense 
of feeling,—easily separated from the parts beneath,—is 
renewable when it peels off, or is destroyed by any accident; 
—it is pierced by an infinite number of pores, which afford 
a passage to the hairs, and in which, terminate, the lympha- 
tics and excretory ducts of the sebaceous glands; it is pre- 
served soft and supple, by the mucus secretion below it, and 
by the perspirable matter opening on it, through those in- 
numerable pores. It is generally imagined by anatomists, 
that, this membrane is formed by the condensation of a 
fluid, furnished by the extremities of the capillary arteries. 

Under the true skin, and over the muscles, Nature has 
placed another covering, called the membrana cellularis, or 
cellular membrane; between this membrane and the true 
skin, lie a number of small glands, called sebaceous glands: 
these glands have one or more excretory ducts, every where opening on the surface of the skin, through which is
transmitted the fluid the glands secrete, to lubricate the 
skin, and keep it lax, and a very important office they do per- 
form. Other glands separate a fatty matter of the skin, of 
the nature of suet, and these are found, in those parts of the 
body, which are most exposed to the action of the air; in 
other parts it does not contain any. 

The skin is capable of being distended, and of contracting 
itself to a surprising degree; it has a variety of uses; but we 
shall confine ourselves to that one only, which is most parti- 
cularly interesting to our subject, namely, the secretion of 
the matter of perspiration. I must not here be understood 
as speaking of a fluid floating in, and circulating with the 
blood, but, of a fluid which the vessels and glands them- 
selves prepare and elaborate, upon which, they impress 
characters of a greater, or lesser, degree of malignity, accord- 
|P_27
ing to the degree of stimulus with which they are oppressed. 
This matter, in its natural state, is only a watery fluid, but
when by any exciting cause, its quantity is increased, its na- 
ture is changed, and it immediately appears to contain a sa- 
line principle, along with a certain quantity of inflammable 
air. 

In acute diseases, convulsions, and epilepsy, its altera- 
tions are frequently very remarkable, so that its smell be- 
comes disgusting and intolerable. From numberless other 
causes, it frequently happens, that this secretion is won- 
derfully changed, so that the matter furnished by it, ad- 
heres to, and corrodes the skin, and forms a chronic cu- 
taneous disease. 

This last subject, is meant to be investigated in this Trea- 
tise. 

[}OF CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS. }]
The appearance, of cutaneous eruptions, varies conside- 
rably, either on account of the different sensibility of the 
persons affected, or, of the different character of the secreted 
fluid. 

Sometimes they present themselves, as a red efflorescence, 
under which a white powder is formed, which, after some 
time, falls off, and leaves the skin apparently healthy; the 
efflorescence, however, again makes its appearance, and 
again goes off in the same way. These alterations continue 
for life, unless cured by a topical remedy. 

At other times, there are very small pustules or pimples, 
like millet-seed, filled with a transparent water, which when 
shed, condenses and forms crusts or scabs; these detach 
themselves, but the skin underneath being inflamed, pours 
|P_28
out fresh matter, which undergoes the same change as the 
first. 

Sometimes, likewise, there are pustules, containing serum, 
which at first is white, then becomes yellow, excudes, and 
is converted into crusts; at other times the disease puts on 
the appearance and symptoms of the itch. What is called
black worms frequently appear on the nose, the chin, the 
cheek bones, &c. this is the sebaceous matter of the 
glands, obstructed and lodging in the ducts, which when 
squeezed out, have the appearance of worms; the black- 
ness at the outward extremity is dirt, too much insinuated 
to wash off; and the reason they infest these parts particu- 
larly, is owing to the ducts being larger on those extremities 
than in other parts. 

And lastly, in other instances, there is only a redness in 
the skin, or spots, which prove extremely troublesome, 
from the itching which attends them. Sensations of prick- 
ing and itching almost constantly attend diseases of this na- 
ture, and it scarcely ever happens, that they go off of them- 
selves. 

That these diseases of the skin, are, in general, simply local 
affections, was an opinion entertained by Dr. Cullen, one 
of the most enlightened Physicians of the present age; and 
from the numerous remote causes, it evidently appears, that 
a depraved secretion, in the cutaneous capillary arte- 
ries, and the vicious elaborated matter, by the cutaneous 
glands, are the proximate cause of the disease. 

I. This acrid and corrosive matter, could not exist in the 
mass of blood, without exciting grievous disorders in the 
animal economy; but, as the latter does not exist, there is 
not any reason for supposing the existence of the former. 

II. Those persons who are subject to eruption, generally 
enjoy good health, and execute their functions without in- 
convenience. 

|P_29
III. Those who have a bad constitution, and in whom 
one might, with some appearance of probability, suppose 
an acrimony existing in their fluids, are least of all subject 
to eruptions. They are never met with in cases of chloro- 
sis and cachexy. 

IV. The eruption is generally confined to some one par- 
ticular part; as to the nose, the cheeks, the breast, or the ex- 
tremities, but almost, always, to the face alone. 

If it were true, that the arteries received from the blood, 
the matter which occasioned the eruption, and that they discharge it upon the surface of the body, why do they 
not discharge it in equal proportion upon every part of it? 
Would it not be absurd to suppose, that the artery A, or the 
artery B alone, should have a power of selecting, every thing 
viciated, from the general mass, whilst all the other vessels 
of the system receive their blood from the same source? 

V. Cutaneous disorders, are not peculiar to any particular 
class of individuals, but attack all without distinction. 

Thus, we meet with them alike, in the voluptuary, and 
the ascetic; in those who are little sensible to the allure- 
ments of wine, or the still softer ones of love; in those who 
do not work, as in those who do: in a word, the disease at- 
tacks persons of all temperaments, characters, and passions. 
This, precludes every suspicion of a specific acrimony of the 
humours, as it could not be found in the midst of circum- 
stances so opposite to each other. 

VI. And lastly, if there really existed a disease in the 
fluids, some advantage might be derived from the use of 
those means, which Physicians have characterised under the 
titles of edulcorants, refrigerants, balsamic and antisceptic me- 
dicines; but, on the contrary, experience has unfortunately 
shewn, that instead of the patients receiving benefit from 
their employment, the disease is uniformly exasperated, and 
|P_30
becomes worse and worse: for confirmation of this fact I have 
only to appeal to the tribunal of those who have been the 
victims of their credulity. The skin is therefore the source of 
the eruption. 

M. Lorry, a very ingenious French Physician, who has 
written a very voluminous work upon cutaneous diseases, 
adduces many instances of persons, who the instant after 
having eaten of certain kinds of aliment, or taken certain 
liquids, had the face, or some other part of the body covered 
with pimples, which disappeared as soon as the irritation of 
the stomach had subsided. 

Eruptions, also, frequently appear, in a very remarkable 
short time after drinking cold liquors, particularly cyder, 
when heated; this is one eruption which often finally be- 
comes a real chronical cutaneous disease. 

Riverious Hoffman, and all eminent practitioners, have 
remarked, that, the saburra of the alimentary canal, frequent- 
ly occasions erysipelatous affections, which go off as soon as 
the saburra is evacuated. 

Pechlin, quotes examples, of instantaneous eruptions, 
produced by violent emotions of the mind, and the history 
of medicine teems with similar examples. 

A woman, Hyppocrates tells us, had, during pregnancy, 
an exanthematous affection of the face, which went off im- 
mediately after delivery. 

There are many women, as M. Lory has observed, who 
in certain delicate circumstances, have eruptions which last 
as long as their cause continues to exist, and no longer. 

From these observations, it is evident, that the skin has a 
consent or sympathy with every part of the nervous system, 
—that every impression, whether physical or moral, may 
easily become an indirect stimulus to the skin, and, that this 
stimulus is capable of altering its functions in such a way, as 
to give rise to a secretion of an acrid matter, and consequent 
eruption. 

|P_31
Since we are here in possession of causes which explain, 
in the most satisfactory manner, the origin of cutaneous dis- 
eases, it is by no means necessary to seek for another in the 
blood, and gratuitously suppose the existence of an universal
acrimony. 

The term acrimony, is, in its application, extremely ana- 
logous, to the occult qualities so much in use, among the an- 
cients; that is to say, a term void of sense, a term, to which 
Physicians only associate false and arbitrary ideas. 

The acrimony which is generally accused, is that of the 
scurvy. 

It is commonly the want of sound fresh animal food, with 
the want of vegetables, which gives rise to the scurvy; but, 
in London, neither of these is wanting: we are provided with 
excellent fermented malt liquors, as beer and porter, with 
brandy, rum, and other spirits, and foreign wines, which 
may all be considered as so many antiscorbutics [/6./]. We are 
not in the neighbourhood of marshes; salted or smoak-dryed 
flesh or fish do not constitute any considerable part of our 
food, neither do we drink putrid or stagnated water, which 
give the disposition to scurvy. In a word, however it may 
have suited the interest of regulars or irregulars to insist upon 
it, our mode of living, and our situation, are by no means, 
favourable to its production. 

Scurvy is preceded or accompanied by symptoms, which 
are never met with in the cutaneous affections of which we are 
speaking. In fact, the scurvy begins by a spontaneous 
weakness, or sense of weight in the whole body, pain in the 
muscles, inability to walk, a difficult and laborious res- 
piration. The colour of the face of scorbutic patients, is 
pale and sallow, the mouth exhales a fetid smell, the gums 
become red, painful, and flabby, and liable to bleed upon the 
slightest pressure, the teeth fall out, flying pains are felt in 
|P_32
different parts of the body, bleedings come on, and lastly, 
(and not till then) ulcerations make their appearance, parti- 
cularly in the legs, and the skin becomes covered with an 
itchy eruption, pustules, and crusts. 

The matter which produces the eruption is so acrid as to 
corrode the skin, and its smell is highly disgusting and alka- 
line. This short sketch evinces the enormous difference, 
which obtains between simple affections of the skin, and 
the real scurvy.

Those who confound them together, either are unac- 
quainted with the causes, and nature of these diseases, or 
they abuse the confidence which the world, without suffi- 
cient examination, may repose upon their talents or integrity. 

Having laid down these principles, which are supported 
both by reasoning and facts, I may advance, without running 
a risk of being accused of temerity, that, cutaneous affections, 
being a local disease, require a local treatment.

(NOTE.) The single authority of Mr. Gowland upon this 
point, may not, perhaps, be of sufficient weight to carry 
along with it conviction and persuasion, but, the world, 
surely, will not refuse to accord its confidence to that of 
men of science. The Proprietors, therefore, take the liberty 
of adducing the authority, of one of the most respectable surgeons, this, or any other country can boast of, and, whose 
works are known in every part of Europe; we mean the 
Professor Bell, of the University of Edinburgh. 

"It was" says he, "till lately believed, that eruptive 
diseases of this nature (herpetic) could never appear but in 
consequence of some general morbid affection of the system, 
and, accordingly, a great variety of internal remedies have 
been recommended, by almost every author who has written 
upon the subject. It has even been commonly considered, 
as an unsafe and dangerous practice, to attempt the cure of 
|P_33
such eruptions in any other way, than by correcting the fluids 
which at first were supposed to have produced them: it is 
somewhat singular, however, that the opinion should have 
remained so long uncontroverted by regular practitioners; 
as, from the writings of many old authors it appears, that complaints of this kind were constantly and easily cured, 
as they still are, by every itinerant, with local external ap- 
plication only. 

"This, we should imagine, ought, very soon, to have over- 
turned the general notion, which prevailed with respect to 
the nature of those disorders, and which seemed, all along, 
to have no other foundation than antiquity for its support. 
Modern practitioners, however, not being shackled by such 
authority, have, in many instances, ventured to dispute, and 
boldly to deviate from, the opinions of their predecessors, 
and the improvements which have universally resulted from 
such a free spirit of enquiry, have never yet given them rea- 
son to repent their having done so. 

"This, in no instance, has been more remarkable, nor at- 
tended with better effects, than in the treatment of cuta- 
neous disorders, which, from having been very perplexed, and intricate, will soon, it is hoped, become a very simple, 
and easy part of the practitioner's employment. 

"Instead of the tedious, and debilitating courses of medi- 
cines, which patients went through formerly, and which, 
perhaps, they are still too frequently obliged to undergo, it 
is now found, that the greatest number of these complaints, are 
more certainly, and speedily removed, by the use of local remedies 
merely, than they ever were by a contrary course."

BELL, on the Theory and Management of Ulcers. 

Sect. ix, page 336. 

[/7./]

|P_34
Bell became convinced, by long experience, that the ex- 
ternal application of medicaments, rarely disappoint the ex- 
pectations of the Physician and Patient. He enumerates se- 
veral of those employed, as well by him as others, and ob- 
serves, that the principle dependence, is to be placed upon 
those which are of an astringent and drying quality. 

I have been able to discover a remedy which I may with 
the greatest propriety stile "the Specific for Cutaneous Dis- 
eases;" it has a great advantage over those which have gene- 
rally been employed, namely, that so far from possessing any 
the slightest repellant quality, it is the very reverse, and 
acts in a mode diametrically opposite thereto. Its operation con- 
fists in taking off the spasm of the extremities of the capillary 
arteries, removing the inflammation where it exists, and 
gradually bringing back the excretorious vessels to the dis∣charge of their natural functions. 

Some days after its employment, the inflammation disap- 
pears, and consequently the transudation; after which, the 
skin resumes its natural state and complection. If there are 
any pustules, they become in the first place less troublesome, 
which shew that the lymph they contain has lost somewhat 
of its malignant properties. 

Lastly, they disappear altogether, and never appear again 
in any part of the body, except some new cause arises, or 
that the natural texture of the skin should be inadequate to 
resist the power of the external air, in which case its appli- 
cation should be sometimes repeated. 

In those cases, which, actually owe their rise to some spe- 
cific virus, as the scrofulus, venereal, &c. even though 
the morbific cause be destroyed, the local disease of the skin 
is incapable of curing itself. Vessels which have been in 
the habit of making, a depraved secretion, do not of 
themselves, change this disposition, although the mass of 
|P_35
blood and the constitution be in a healthy and natural state. 
Van Swieten, when speaking of venereal ulcers, has made 
this observation: Here the necessity of a topical treatment 
becomes particularly evident; that is, the application, of a 
remedy, to the part affected. Thus, the Lotion is productive of 
the greatest advantage, even in scrofulus, and scorbutic cases. 

We have said, that there are sebaceous glands in the skin, 
the excretory ducts of which, throw out a suetty matter, and 
that there is likewise a great number of excretory vessels, 
which are, a continuation of the capillary arteries. 

These ducts and vessels, are frequently, constricted by sud- 
den cold, so, that the matter which ought to be exhaled, is 
pent up, and if not evacuated by the intestines or kidneys, 
it forms tubercles, or hard knots, and small vissicles, as has 
been observed, by the celebrated Ludwig. 

The face, is the most common seat of the eruption of which 
we are speaking, on account of its being exposed more 
than any other part of the body, to the action of the air. 
Eruptions will sometimes frequently remain, after the cause 
has ceased; for, nature is not always equal, by its own pow- 
er, of reestablishing these minute organs in their natural 
functions; in consequence of which, the skin remains dis- 
figured, not only by a partial redness, but by scabious irre- 
gularities on its surface, and even by matter contained in 
pustules, and by crusts, which arise from the condensation 
of the lymph, escaping from the vesicles. 

If this affection be unfortunately neglected on its first ap- 
pearance, it soon overleaps its first limits, extends its sphere 
of action, and every day gives additional force to its malig- 
nity. This disease, commits horrid ravages on those persons 
whose general system is in a state of debility. 

The female sex, the endearing bond of society, when 
once attacked by these disorders, suffer more from them 
than men, on account of their skin being possessed of a far 
greater degree of delicacy and sensibility. 

|P_36
How distressing must it not be to a fine woman, to the 
perfecting of whose face nature has lavished all her power, 
to find the beauteous fabric spotted and discoloured with 
disgusting pimples, which destroy the effect of all her 
charms? It is in this case, that the imagination, whose in- 
fluence on the softer sex is so very extensive, takes the lead, 
exasperates the disease, and renders it a thousand times 
more obstinate: and yet I can assure my readers, from long 
and assiduous observation, drawn from the experience of 
many years, that these impurities, arising from obstructed 
perspiration, are the easiest of all others to overcome. The 
vessels, when once freed from the matter contained in them, 
and which has become foreign and vitiated by stagnation, 
readily resume the tone and energy necessary for cutaneous 
secretion. 

The Lotion, constantly produces this effect; it washes and 
cleanses the surface, and, by penetrating within the small, 
obstructed vessels, dissolves the condensed fluids contained 
in them, and facilitates their expuision. 

When this is executed, the skin resumes its natural state, 
becomes smooth and polished, and, exhibits that brilliancy of 
tint which depends upon the free circulation of the fluids 
in the cutaneous arteries, and, the continual afflux of those, 
furnished by the different glands and vessels, which are found 
in the skin. 

In addressing my reflections to the public, I have ad- 
vanced, that simple cutaneous diseases, are local affections 
only, and I have given proofs of the truth of this assertion; I 
have said, that, the mode of treating them, ought to be local; 
and, both authority, facts, and reasoning, have confirmed 
what I have advanced. 

I have asserted, that my Lotion, is a Specific for these Eruptions; and I appeal to those who have experienced its 
efficacy, after they had been disappointed by internal means: 
|P_37
thus, the goodness and infallibility of my Specific, is a suffi- 
cient answer to, and compleatly confutes the invidious at- 
tacks that have been made against me, for its introduction. 

FINIS. 

[}ADVERTISEMENT. }]
Although this Medicine was originally invented for diseased 
skins, yet, every impurity or defect, however trifling, being 
a degree of disease, it has been found the only composition 
capable of cleansing and clearing the thickness and opacity of 
the skin, and of restoring it to its original state of nature, 
clearness,and perfection. An account of its efficacy in this 
particular, with the most undeniable evidences of this fact, 
may be had in a pamphlet (gratis,) of 

THE PROPRIETORS, 
NO. 55, LONG-ARE, LONDON, 

Where Gowland's Lotion is prepared and sold...... Quarts, 
8s. 6d. Pints, 5s. 3d. 
