
|P_
ON 
GENERATION. 

|P_
|P_
[}SECTION I.}]
Of the various Hypotheses, by which the 
Phenomena of Generation have been 
attempted to be explained. 

WHAT is the nature of that change, 
which takes place within a female, 
when after having experienced the 
most delightful of all sensual pleasures, and 
being duly impregnated, form, and existence 
are about to be given to her offspring? 

|P_2
Few questions hare ever awakened more 
general, and more ardent curiosity than this; 
for however romantic it may appear to attempt 
to ascertain the observations, and thoughts of 
our first parents, yet the supposition is natural, 
that the wonderful effects, and as it were 
repeated creations produced by the indulgence 
of this instinct, must first have excited their 
surprise, and then led them to a train of re- 
flections. 

Considering the innumerable times the 
phenomena of generation have occurred since 
the days of Adam, it becomes a humiliating 
reproach to the understanding of his descen- 
dants, that during all that long succession of 
time, they have not been able to give any 
satisfactory explanation of the matter; espe- 
cially as it appears to have soon become a 
very early subject of study with speculative 
men: at least most of the physiological frag- 
ments of the ancient philosophers and physi- 
|P_3
cians, [/1./], which have been handed down to 
us, consist in general of inquiries into the 
mysteries of generation; and indeed since that, 
there is hardly a period in which the same kind 
of researches have not been more or less pro- 
secuted. 

Even in the darkest times of the middle 
ages, when the spirit of inquiry seemed almost 
entirely lost in the lethargy of monastic bar- 
barism, this subject appears every now and 
then to have awakened a spark of curiosity, 
and to have stimulated some of the holy fathers 
of those times to the composition of very 
sensual and obscene works, some of which 
have reached our days [/2./], and serve to prove 
|P_4
that their authors were at least interested in 
the theoretical, if not in the practical part of 
generation. 

We are not therefore to be surprised, 
that the attempt to solve this great problem 
of nature encreased rapidly, beyond the power 
of numbering, leaving no passage untrod which 
afforded any hopes of leading to a solution of 
the mystery; hence there hardly exists an- 
other spot in the whole region of natural 
knowledge, surrounded by more intricate la- 
byrinths, or false guides than this. 

Drelingcourt, a teacher of Boerhaave's, 
collected no less than two hundred and sixty- 
two vague hypotheses on generation, from the 
writings of earlier writers. 

In spite of the astonishing variety, and 
number of paths, which seemed to lead to the 
solution of this physiological problem, yet they 
are all of them but so many branches of two 
principal roads; the one conducting to the 
|P_5
doctrine of Evolution, the other to that of 
Epigenists.

It is either supposed that the prepared, 
but at the same time unorganized rudiments 
of the fœtus, first begins to be gradually or- 
ganized when it arrives at its place of desti- 
nation at a due time, and under the necessary 
circumstances. This is the doctrine of Epi- 
genisis; 

Or, we deny every sort of generation, 
and believe that the germ of every animal, and 
every plant that ever has lived and ever will 
live, were all created at one and the same 
time, namely, at the beginning of the world; 
and that all that is necessary is, that one 
generation should be developed after the 
other. Such is the celebrated theory of 
Evolution. 

But the manner in which this evolu- 
tion happens, has been differently accounted 
for. 

|P_6
Heraclitus, surnamed the gloomy, and 
Hippocrates, or whoever the author of those 
books on regimen was, which appeared un- 
der his name, together with many of their 
followers, were of opinion, that those germs 
were scattered up and down the whole globe, 
where they wandered about, each in search of 
the genitals of a ready made relation of their 
own kind, which having once found, they 
took lodgement there, threw off their enve- 
lopement, and now became fit for being 
themselves evolved. 

If we except the imposing name of the 
authors to whom this theory is ascribed, it 
has little else to recommend it to our atten- 
tion. It is so completely built on fanciful 
suppositions, that it would be difficult to say, 
what hypothesis might not be credited were 
we to yield the smallest faith to such a doc- 
trine. The late professor Gesner, who wrote 
a commentary on this romance of Hippo- 
crates, apologizes for himself by adopting the 
bon mot of Queen Christina, "that the chi- 
|P_7
meras of the ancients were just as 
good as those of the moderns. "

More approbation has been given to 
two other theories of evolution, according to 
each of which, the germs did not wander 
about, but those of the same kind were all 
neatly wrapt up, and encased one within an- 
other, so that the first parent of each animal, 
and plant was supposed to contain all the 
germs of every succeeding generation; co- 
pulation only serving to awaken them to their 
state of evolution. The only difference be- 
tween the two theories was, that the one 
supposed the germs to inhabit the testicles of 
their father, whilst the other would have it, 
that they resided in the ovaria of their mo- 
ther. 

No sooner was the art of making magni- 
fying glasses discovered, and by that means 
an opening procured to a new world in 
the creation, than the novelty of the dis- 
covery, and facility of its application, by af- 
|P_8
fording an opportunity to a number of micro- 
scopical experiments, naturally led to the most 
unexpected sights. 

Among the great amateurs of this kind 
of amusement, was one Ludwig von Ham- 
mon, a young man born at Dantzig, who 
during the time of his studying medicine at 
Leyden, and in the course of his microscopical 
pursuits, discovered in the month of August 
1677, in a drop of the semen of a cock re- 
cently dissected, a kind of ocean, in which 
swam thousands of little lively active animals. 

The same unexpected phenomenon was 
also observed in the ripe semen of other male 
animals, and in these animalculæ were im- 
mediately thought to be seen, the germs of 
subsequent perfect, animals. By this discovery, 
a key was supposed to be found, which would 
unlock the whole mystery of generation. 

Now I cannot conceive how some pro- 
fessed philosophers, and natural historians have 
|P_9
been led to deny life and voluntary motion to 
those animalculæ; but I am still more at a loss 
to imagine, how another set of philosophers 
have been induced to dignify these animalculæ 
of a stagnant animal fluid, to the high rank 
of the organized germs of successive gene- 
rations. 

Without entering into a long and tedious 
detail of all the doubts and difficulties, which 
rise up in opposition to so singular a theory, I 
shall content myself with adding a few reflec- 
tions, which to the most uninformed readers, 
will appear sufficient for calling in question 
this imaginary dignity of the animalculæ of 
the semen of animals. 

How comes it that the animalculæ of 
the semen of animals the most nearly related, 
differ so much from each other, whilst scarce 
any two things resemble one another so much 
as the animalculæ of animals, the most op- 
posite to each other, both in nature and form? 
|P_10
For instance, the animalculæ in the semen of 
frogs, as represented by Mr. von Gleichen, 
bear no kind of resemblance to those of the 
common newt, as represented by Spallan- 
zani; whereas on the other hand, two drops 
of water cannot resemble each other more 
strongly, than the animalculæ of the semen 
of a man, and those of an ass, as represented 
by the first of these accurate observers. 

This same modern advocate for the digni- 
ty of these animalculæ, has already discovered 
two kinds of them in the same drop of semen of 
a frog, and yet both of them are perfectly dis- 
tinct from those which Roesel represents as 
animalculæ of the semen of the same animal; 
besides the former were not only discovered 
in the vesiculæ seminales, but also in the 
kidneys: mere appearances, as evinced by the 
irregular and uncertain shape of the inhabi- 
tants of the male semen, and which irregu- 
larity and uncertainty refutes their pretended 
dignity so completely, that one might as well 
|P_11
hope with Paracelsus [/3./], and the Painter 
Gautier [/4./], to be able to produce a perfect hu- 
man embryo from male semen, or expect to see, 
as the famous academician Hartzoeker as- 
|P_12
sures us he did, the little embryo sitting in the 
body of each animalcule, in the same crooked 
and confined posture as in the female womb [/5./]. 

Long before the animalculæ of the semen 
were discovered, Joseph de Aromatariis found 
out a third way to explain the mystery of ge- 
neration, by means of the theory of evolution; 
I mean that one which supposes the ovaria 
of every female, even before impregnation, 
to contain a whole provision of organized 
molecules or germs, perfectly ready for evo- 
lution. 

Swammerdam also adopted this opinion, 
but owing to the great figure which the 
|P_13
animalculæ of the semen soon afterwards 
made in the world, it remained but little 
known until two very distinguished authors, 
Haller, and Bonnet, at once raised its repu- 
tation. 

According to this theory we, and indeed 
all the children of Adam, were at one time 
ipso facto, pent up in the two ovaria of our 
common mother Eve. There we lay, as it 
were asleep, and although astonishing little 
creatures, yet completely organized bodies, 
and perfect miniatures of the forms we have 
since assumed; for says Haller, "All our 
viscera, and the bones themselves were then 
already formed, although in a kind of fluid 
state." That which we call impregnation, 
is nothing else than the action of awakening 
the germ from its lethargic state by means of 
the male semen, which stimulates the little 
creature's heart to the first pulsation; and so 
on. 

|P_14
The same kind of idea has lately in- 
duced a very celebrated naturalist of Geneva, 
and a warm advocate of this theory, to plan 
out for us a history of organized bodies pre- 
vious to the state of impregnation, from 
which we learn, first, that we are all much 
older than what we suppose ourselves to be, 
secondly, that all mankind are exactly the same 
age, the great grandfather not a second older 
than the youngest of his great grand children, 
thirdly, that this respectable age, which we 
are all of, may be about six thousand years. 
The same natural historian also agrees en- 
tirely in opinion with Bazin; that since that 
charming long series of years, when we were 
all packed together along with Cain and Abel, 
and the other two hundred thousand million 
of men, which according to the best calcu- 
lations, have since that period gone quo pius 
Æneas quo Tellus dives et Ancus; in a word, 
since the first creation, during which time 
we have been in a kind of lethargic sleep, 
though not entirely without motion; that 
|P_15
during the whole fifty-seven centuries, I say, 
previous to our being awakened by the above- 
mentioned stimulus, we were according to 
Bazin's opinion, always growing a little and 
little: for instance, we were most probably 
rather a little bigger at the time we lay beside 
Cain's nieces, than when all their uncles and 
aunts were of the party, as it is very natural 
to suppose, that we must then have been consi- 
derably more pinched for room. In this 
manner our apartment became gradually 
more easy, and commodious in proportion as 
our forefathers were evolved, and we agreed 
with it, for we kept continually stretching 
ourselves more and more, until the succession 
of evolution came at last to our turn!! 

However extravagant and romantic such 
conclusions must appear, yet they follow as 
natural deductions from the premises of the 
theory, which gave rise to them. In support 
of this theory, its most celebrated abettors, 
Haller, and Spallanzani, adduced many ex- 
periments, and observations, which we shall 
|P_16
examine more particularly in the next Sec- 
tion. When we consider how conclusive 
and striking these observations appear to be 
at first sight, we shall not wonder at the 
general assent, which during these thirty 
years past, has been given to the doctrine of 
the pre-existence of complete organized mo- 
lecules in the ovaria of females before impreg- 
nation. I myself not only believed in the 
truth of it, but defended it in many of my 
writings; so that in fact the present little 
volume contains a confession of my former 
errors, in regard to which, I wish that may 
be true, which Mr. de Luc says some where 
or other, that, "An error once detected, 
becomes a more material truth, than many 
positive ones, which we immediately ac- 
knowledge to be such. "

The unexpected success of a small ex- 
periment, which I made, however, with a 
view of ascertaining the truth of the doctrine 
of evolution, first brought me back to the 
point from which I ought to have set out, and 
|P_17
opened a new road to a very opposite doc- 
trine. He who thus fights with nature, may 
from an unexpected sight, often discover her 
most concealed treasures. 

What gave occasion to the instituting 
the experiment was as follows: In one of my 
walks during some holidays which I spent in 
the country, I discovered in a stream, a sort 
of green armed polypus, which differed from 
the common green kind by its long spiral 
body, and by having short and rather im- 
moveable tentaculæ. With the wonders of 
this little animal, I intended to amuse my 
country friends. The delightful warm sum- 
mer weather which then prevailed, and the 
hardy constitution of the polypus itself, fa- 
voured the experiments which we made, 
to discover its power of reproduction so much, 
that the act of renewal of the parts became 
almost perceptible. By the second and third 
day, the maimed and divided animal was so 
many new ones, each with arms, body, tail, 
|P_18
&c. But we plainly remarked that the re- 
generated animals, although supplied with 
plenty of proper food, were always much 
smaller than before, and a mutilated rump, 
always diminished very evidently, both in 
length and diameter, in proportion as the lost 
parts were renewed [/6./]. 

Soon after my return to town, I was 
called to a patient who had a caries. The 
disease occupied the lower end of the femur 
immediately above the knee, and had caused 
|P_19
a pretty extensive and deep ulcer. It healed 
gradually, but in proportion as the wound 
filled up, and the cicactrix formed, all the 
surrounding parts sunk so, that the edge of 
the cicatrix being almost on an equality with 
the neighbouring parts, the whole formed a 
broad, though rather superficial excavation [/7./]. 
This was exactly the same thing mutatis 
mutandis, with what happened to the po- 
lypus. 

I have since that period, spent a great 
deal of my leisure moments in the further in- 
vestigation of this subject, both in experiment 
and reflection; the consequence of which has 
been to convince me fully. 

|P_20
That there is no such thing in nature, as 
pre-existing organized germs: but that the 
unorganized matter of generation, after being 
duly prepared, and having arrived at its place 
of destination takes on a particular action, or 
nisus, which nisus continues to act through the 
whole life of the animal, and that by it the first 
form of the animal, or plant is not only deter- 
mined, but afterwards preserved, and when 
deranged, is again restored. A nisus, which 
seems therefore to depend on the powers of life, 
but which is as distinct from the other qualities 
of living bodies, (sensibility, irritability, and 
contractility) as from the common properties of 
dead matter: that it is the chief principle of 
generation, growth, nutrition, and reproduc- 
tion, and that to distinguish it from all others, 
it may be denominated the Formative Nisus 
(Bildungstrieb, or Nisus formativus). 

It is to be hoped, that there is no 
necessity for reminding the reader, that the 
expression Formative Nisus, like that of At- 
|P_21
traction [/8./], serves only to denote a power, 
whose constant operation is known from ex- 
perience, but whose cause, like the causes 
of most of the qualities of matter, is a qualitas 
occulta to us [/9./] We may say of this, as of 
|P_22
all similar powers, what Ovid says:—Causa 
latet, vis est notissima. But the great merit 
in the study of these powers, is to ascertain 
more accurately their effects, and to reduce 
them under general laws [/10./]. 

D'Alembert's successor, Mr. de Con- 
dorcet, in his Eulogy on Haller, and when 
speaking of Irritability, says, "The truth of 
this doctrine was, as usually is the case, at 
first denied; but when it was discovered, 
|P_23
and that could not be done any longer with 
honour, they concluded with observing, 
that it had been discovered long before! "

When it is considered that some people 
have been lately possessed of sufficient pene- 
tration to discover the doctrine of irritability 
in the writings of Homer, and the circulation 
of the blood described in the books of So- 
lomon the Preacher; it would be really asto- 
nishing if this doctrine of the Formative 
Principle were allowed the merits of novelty, 
and that nothing of the kind were to be dis- 
covered in all the works which have been 
written on the subject within these two thou- 
sand years past [/11./];especially as the Vis 
|P_24
Plastica of the ancients, and more particularly 
of the peripatetic schools, would seem as far 
as the concordance of name goes to attempt 
one to such a qui pro quo.

|P_25
I should be extremely happy, however, if 
any person would name one of the old writers, 
who, in describing the Vis Plastica, has given 
such a distinct idea of it, or such a one as 
corresponds so well with the phenomena of ge- 
neration [/12./], as that which I have attempted 
to give (especially in the Third Section) of 
this Essay. 

|P_26
Professor Wolff of Petersburg, a phy- 
siologist of great penetration, hath explained 
the growth of Animals, and Vegetables by 
another power, which he calls Vis Essentialis,
and which one on first hearing, might be apt 
to confound with the Nisus Formativus.

Whoever takes the trouble, however, 
of perusing the sentiments which Professor 
Wolff entertains of the Vis Essentialis, as 
given in his Theoria Generationis, will soon 
discern the great difference there is between 
the two [/13./]

|P_27
According to him the Vis Essentialis is 
only that power, by which the nourishment 
is distributed to the different parts of an ani- 
mal, or vegetable. This is, indeed, necessary 
to the Formative Principle; but it is quite 
distinct from the principle itself. For this 
|P_28
Vis Essentialis exerts itself with equal force in 
the growth of even the most deformed, and 
unnatural excrescences of plants, and trees, 
&c. where the Formative Principle does not 
seem to act at all, or at least with no re- 
gularity. 

On the other hand, the Vis Essentialis 
may be very weak, or deficient, as in such 
organized bodies, which are badly nourished, 
whilst the Formative Principle remains in 
full force, and so on. 

However unpleasant it may be to me, 
yet I feel myself forced, before entering more 
particularly on the nature of the Formative 
Principle, to premise a refutation of the ar- 
guments which have been brought, and espe- 
cially by Baron von Haller, in favour of 
evolution of the female egg [/14./]. What con- 
|P_29
soles me, however, in being thus obliged to 
dissent from the opinions of a man, to whose 
works and writings I owe so much, is, partly 
the reflection, that whatever useful may be 
contained in the present sheets, was occa- 
sioned by examining into, and prosecuting 
his enquiries, and partly my doubts whether 
he himself might not have altered his ideas, 
and have relinquished, in a great degree, his 
old opinions on the subject, had he lived to 
have finished that part of the last edition of 
his Physiology [/15./], which treats of this matter. 

|P_30
Indeed, had Haller still persisted to sup- 
port the doctrine of evolution, and oppose 
that of gradual formation, his fame would 
have suffered as little from it, as Harvey's 
from his denying the existence of the lacteal 
vessels, or Newton's from his disbelief of the 
possibility of colourless tubes in the fern. 

|P_31
[}SECT. II. }]
Examination of the principal Arguments in 
favour of the supposed Pre-existence of 
Organized Germs in the Ovaria of Fe- 
males, and Refutation of a Doctrine. 

ON the 13th of May 1758 was read 
before the Royal Society of Sciences 
at Göttingen, the celebrated paper of Baron 
von Haller, (then president of the society) 
on the formation of the heart in the embryo, 
in which it was believed an argumentum cru- 
cis was offered in support of the doctrine of 
pre-existing germs. The author says, That 
he found that not only the membrane of the 
yolk of an incubated egg, but also its blood- 
vessels, constituting what was called the 
figura venosa, were a continuation of the 
 membrane and blood-vessels of the chick. 
|P_32
But the yolk of the egg existed in the hen 
previous to impregnation, and therefore most 
probably the embryo also, although too small 
to be discovered by our eyes. The prudent 
author however expressed himself at first very 
cautiously and in an undecided manner on 
this syllogism [/16./]. 

Mons. Bonnet, however, who soon after 
published his work on organized bodies, and, 
who was previously propossessed in favour of 
the doctrine of the evolution of pre-existing 
organic germs, took hold of this observation 
of Haller's, and pronounced it to be absolute- 
ly unanswerable, and considered the truth of 
the hypothesis as fully established by it [/17./]. 

|P_33
Haller also allowed himself to be daily 
more and more convinced of the force of his 
own observations, insomuch that in his later 
writings he made little scruple of declaring 
them equally decisive, as his friend Bonnet 
had done. 

|P_34
In acknowledging that I myself, as well 
as some hundred other physiologists, and natu- 
ralists, looked on this celebrated observation 
as the foundation ston# of the theory of evo- 
lution; I hink I need make the less ceremony 
in expressing my astonishment how we could 
have allowed ourselves, as in the present case, 
to attribute so much force to an assertion 
which absolutely proves nothing! 

For, granting it to be fully proved that 
there existed a continuation between the 
membrane and vessels of the chick and yolk, 
(granting it, I say; for, the fact as the most 
accurate, and scrupulous investigation teaches, 
still remains uncertain, as every one will rea- 
dily acknowledge who has taken the pains 
of examining fecundated eggs,) yet it does 
not follow that the membrane and vessels, 
even if they really were a continuation of 
each other, co-existed from the beginning. 
Do we not see many instances in organized 
bodies where this last mentioned circumstance 
exists, and yet where it is impossible to grant 
|P_35
the supposition which has been drawn as a 
conclusion from it. For instance, all those 
singular vegetable productions, which are 
caused by the puncture of certain infects in 
many plants. Thus the Spongiæ cynosbatæ 
are produced entirely in consequence of the 
puncture of the Cynips in the rose-bush. The 
bark of this shrub is continued over this 
spongy and quite accidental production; nay, 
if we take, and cut any fresh branch which 
has some of these spongy bodies on it, we 
shall find that the wood of the branch appears 
to be an evident continuation of the woody 
part of these substances. But shall we from 
hence conclude, that this accidental produc- 
tion originally co-existed with the shrub 
itself, and that in every trunk, and every 
branch of every rose-bush in the world, the 
enveloped germs of innumerable spongiæ 
cynosbatæ should have always lain there like 
so much hidden wealth, and would have 
always remained so until the thousand thou- 
sandth part of them were by chance excited 
|P_36
to evolution by the benevolent puncture of 
a little cynips. 

Again, in the animal kingdom, do we 
not often see after an accidental inflammation 
of any of the viscera, a new membrane 
formed as it were by the effusion of the 
lymphatic part of the blood; and in the course 
of a few days, do we not observe many blood- 
vessels produced in this membrane, which 
anastomose with the blood-vessels of the 
neighbouring viscera; and yet it would be 
ridiculous to suppose that these vessels co- 
existed from the first with the old ones. 
And for fear that it be objected to us, that 
these are mere preternatural appearances in 
the diseased state of animals, we beg them 
to recall the late celebrated membrana deci- 
dua of Dr. Hunter, which after a fruitful 
impregnation, lines the whole cavity of the 
uterus, and whose blood-vessels, especially 
where the umbilical chord is inserted in 
the placenta, are most evidently connected 
|P_37
and anastomose with the blood-vessels of the 
mother. 

In all these cases, the new formed mem- 
branes, and their blood-vessels are the mere 
productions of the neighbouring viscera, 
which renders it probable, that the mem- 
brane and vessels of the embryo in a fecun- 
dated egg, are produced in like manner from 
the membrane and vessels of the yolk. 

Mr. Paul [/18./], a natural historian of great 
penetration, hath objected to Haller's de- 
monstration, that allowing the membranes 
of the yolk with its invisible vessels to have 
pre-existed in the hen, yet it is possible that 
the embryo is only formed during incubation, 
and that its blood-vessels afterward unite with 
the blood-vessels of the membrane of the 
yolk, and thus form an anastomosis. 

|P_38
Baron von Haller immediately declared 
loudly against this objection, and denied it 
altogether as a thing impossible, that the ten- 
der vessels of the microscopic embryo should 
be capable of anastomosing with the large 
blood-vessels of the giant yolk [/19./]

But what is rather singular, is, that 
this same most ingenious and meritorious 
author, who denies the possibility of such an 
anastomosis, supposes without any hesitation, 
and in the same work [/20./], when explaining 
human conception, that the very minute 
germ as soon as it has arrived at the cavity 
of the uterus, forms an adhesion with it by 
|P_39
means of its placenta;—And how? Just in 
the same way that he denies it to the embryo 
of the hen; that is to say, by an anastomosis 
taking place between the microscopic and 
tender branches of the umbilical vessels, and 
the giant ones of the maternal uterus. 

The modern advocates for the theory of 
evolution, have taken this observation of the 
yolk of the egg, as the prop of their hypothesis. 

Long before this however, the spawn of 
the frog had been employed for the same service. 

Near a century indeed before that period, 
Swammerdam announced the wonderful dis- 
covery, that the black points in the spawn of 
a frog were so many perfectly formed little 
frogs, and that they pre-existed in the ovariæ, 
although not to be discovered by the eye. [/21./]

|P_40
The good man seemed to have had a 
pre-sentiment of the uncertainty and insta- 
bility of all vain worldly honours, and he 
therefore, as is well known, soon after be- 
took himself to a more solid mysterious en- 
joyment, in which Mlle. Bourignon bore a 
part. And, indeed, it happened as he appears 
|P_41
to have foreseen; for the ungrateful world 
now ascribe the merits of that discovery to 
the celebrated Abbé Spallanzani, who has 
maintained it in several of his writings, but 
more particularly in the second volume of his 
Essays [/22./]. 

He calls the little black points of the 
fecundated spawn of frogs, Tadpoles, or young 
frogs [/23./]; and as this little black point exact- 
ly resembles the same in the unfecundated 
spawn [/24./], he reasons agreeably to his logic, 
|P_42
that the tadpoles must have existed in the 
mother [/25./]. 

I do not know what would be thought of 
that chemist who assertes that the Arbor 
Dianæ pre-existed in a mass of Amalgam of 
silver, because when a weak solution of silver 
was poured on it, a little tree seemed to spring 
out of it. 

One ought to be ashamed of wasting 
much time in the refutation of an assertion, the 
falsity of which any unprejudiced person who 
is not altogether unaccustomed to observations 
of the kind may convince himself of every 
spring. 

|P_43
Whoever has taken the trouble, accu- 
rately, to examine the spawn of the frog must 
confess, that the idea of demonstrating the little 
black points contained in it to be so many 
complete formed tadpoles, partakes greatly of 
Brother Peters's method of reasoning in the 
Tale of the Tub, where he demonstrates to his 
brothers that the brown loaf is a piece of ex- 
cellent roast mutton. 

But the abettors of the theory of orga- 
nized germs have gone a step further in support 
of their opinions. They refer to cases where 
even young girls, in all their maiden innocence, 
have become pregnant from the untimely, and 
premature evolution of one of these organized 
germs. 

The concurrence of facts is sometimes 
most wonderful. It happened that in the very 
same year that Swammerdam announced his 
discovery in the spawn of the frog, that a case 
was published in the Ephem. rerum. nat. curios.
|P_44
delivered to the society by a celebrated court- 
physician of those times Dr. Claudius, which 
exactly suited as a confirmation of Swam- 
merdam's opinion.—A miller's wife was 
delivered of a little girl whose belly seemed of 
an unusual size. Eight days afterwards this 
little big-bellied child was seized with such 
violent pains and restlessness, that every one 
who was present thought it could not outlive 
the next instant. The sick infant however in 
the mean time actually bore a well-formed, ele- 
gant, lively, little daughter about the size of 
one's middle finger, which was regularly 
baptized. During the time, and after the 
birth, the waters, placenta, and all other 
impurities were rightly discharged. But both 
the little mother and daughter died early the 
following day [/26./]

|P_45
Baron von Haller very judiciously classes 
this case with another from the Transactions 
of the Academy of Sciences of Stockholm, 
where on dissecting a young girl, bones, teeth, 
and hairs were found in a tumor of the my- 
sentery. These two cases he looks on as 
principal evidences for the truth of the doc- 
trine of germs pre-existing in the mother. 

In Schmucker's Miscellaneous Surgical 
Essays an anonymus correspondent sends the 
history of the dissection of a girl, in whom, 
instead of an uterus, there was found a hard 
hairy body of the size of a large walnut, and 
|P_46
which resembled an ill-shaped head. It had 
two perfect teeth, and contained in its cavity 
something like brain. 

Now since the abettors of the theory of 
evolution so loudly remonstrate against, and 
complain of the unfair method of proceeding 
by opposing mere argument to the facts which 
they bring forward in support of their opini- 
ons, I shall for the present totally abstain from 
all reasoning, and endeavour to satisfy these 
gentlemen by adducing fact for fact, observa- 
tion for observation, and those of no less won- 
derful, and entertaining a nature than theirs; 
for they will prove, that not only men but 
male animals have been equally in a thriving 
way with young virgins; and I trust the tes- 
timonies of the truth of these stories will be 
found equally respectable with those of the 
opposite party. 

To the case extracted from the Memoirs 
of the Academy of Stockholm I oppose one 
from the History of the Royal Academy of 
|P_47
Sciences of Paris, where an Abbé was inter- 
rupted very mal apropos whilst instituting some 
experiments on generation. He was alarmed 
by an extraordinary encrease of bulk in a cer- 
tain part, which another Abbé (the unfortunate 
Abelard) was deprived of in consequence of a 
similar experiment. 

The tumor encreased so much that he 
was obliged to submit to an operation, and his 
surgeon assured the academy that he cut an 
ossified child [/27./] from the part. 

To the story of the miller's wife I beg 
leave to subjoin one from the Philosophical 
Transactions of London, where an account is 
given of a male greyhound that bore a living 
puppy per anum; and in the place of Drs. 
Otto an Claudius, who witnessed the truth of 
the first fact, I shall mention two names of 
|P_48
which England ought to boast: Dr. Wallis, 
and Edmund Halley. 

Lastly to the anonymous in Schmucker 
I oppose an anonymous in the works of the 
respectable Fr. Ruysh, who was presented with 
a similar production. It was a bony case, 
half as big as a common walnut, together with 
four perfect mollares, and a knot of hair, 
which, he assured the doctor, he had cut from 
the stomach of a male subject. 

Thus I have adduced authority for au- 
thority; nor do I believe it possible for any 
one to go more conscienteously to work than 
I have done; and so far therefore I ust we 
are quits. 

Were I allowed however to speak my 
mind freely on this matter, I should advise 
all such auxiliary troops to be withdrawn. 
My only reason for bringing them on the field 
was merely to oppose those of my antago- 
nists. 

|P_49
These therefore are the principal argu- 
ments, which, I have to oppose to what the 
advocates for the theory of evolution consider 
as the strongest, and most decisive proofs of 
their theory. 

But experience supplies me with another 
source of facts, which may be used as argu- 
ments against this theory, and which, to 
unprejudiced, and judicious readers, ought to 
be sufficient whereby to ascertain its true degree 
of probability. 

For instance, the well established, and 
universal truth; that the first appearance of a 
newly conceived animal, or plant, is never to 
be discovered immediately on impregnation, 
even by the most powerful armed eye; no 
such thing is to be seen until a considerable 
time has elapsed. 

It is not worth while to enter into a refu- 
tation of the fabulous assertion of Hippocrates, 
and of so many others of his old and worthy 
followers, that perfectly distinct, and well 
|P_50
formed human embryos were to be seen in the 
very first days of conception. Considering 
the few aids, and little opportunity they had 
in those days of making such observations, 
great allowance is to be made; and the more 
so, when we consider that even modern phy- 
sicians of much more extensive experience in 
these matters, have been guilty of similar 
assertions. Mauriceau has amused us with re- 
presentations of fœtusses of one day, and of 
three days and a half, &c. and Malpighi and 
Croune have assured us that they had seen the 
embryo of the chick and its appendices in 
the egg of a trod hen before the egg had been 
sate upon. The last author indeed observed 
it, he says, in the addle egg of hens that never 
had been cocked. 

It is impossible however to discover 
any thing before the third week after concep- 
tion, which any cautious and creditable obser- 
ver would presume to pronounce a human em- 
bryo, and in the fecundated egg nothing can 
be observed, which has even the most distant 
|P_51
resemblance to a chick in the first twelve 
hours, nor indeed until the end of the second 
day. Previous to this period of time peculiar 
to each animal, and vegetable, [/28./] it is quite 
impossible to distinguish the newly conceived 
offspring; which circumstance, considering 
the perfection, and powers of our microscopes, 
is by no means favourable to the theory of 
evolution. 

Nor, is it at all easy to comprehend how the 
advocates for that theory make the phenomena 
of the accidental origin and growth of certain 
preternatural parts agree with their doctrine 
of pre-existing organic germs. 

A few instances of this kind will serve 
instead of many. 

|P_52
A woman conceives, but the fœtus in- 
stead of being in the uterus, is situated in one of 
the Fallopean tubes. The tube at last bursts 
from the increase of bulk of this strayed animal, 
and it falls into the cavity of the abdomen. 
What does nature do? She pours out a quan- 
tity of plastic lymph, which forms itself evidently 
into organized membranes, incrusting and 
inveloping the fœtus like a mummy, by which 
it is prevented from putrefaction; for were 
this allowed to take place, it would occasion 
certain death to the mother, but who, preserved 
by this contrivance, is enabled to carry the 
troublesome, though not dangerous load, for 
a considerable number of years. On opening 
the body after death, we evidently perceive 
this new, and, accidentally formed membrane, 
to be richly supplied with blood vessels, [/29./]
|P_53
which it would be rather difficult to prove, had 
pre-existed in the organic germ. 

A person breaks both bones of the fore- 
arm, but is so restless as to disturb nature in 
her usual process of healing them, that is, by 
means of a new ossification. In this case what 
does she do? She forms a new joint of the 
broken ends of both bones; making as it were 
a second elbow which can be moved at 
pleasure without any assistance from the other 
hand. 

Another person dislocates his thigh bone 
from it's natural situation in the Ilium, and 
nature endeavours to remedy the evil, by for- 
ming a new socket for it [/30./]. 

|P_54
A child is born with a hydrocephalus, 
occasioned by mere accidental circumstances; 
such for instance as the frequent, and too 
violent connection of the father with the 
mother, during the time of her gestation. 
Owing to this disease, the cranium becomes 
preternaturally distended, and immence spaces 
are left between the very thin, and greatly 
distended bones. In order to remedy this, 
nature forms detached osseous points in these 
interstices, which points, at last become true 
ossa triquetra, filling up all the dangerous 
voids, and uniting all the bones of the head 
together. 

These ossa triquetra however do not 
belong to the natural structure of the fœtus, and are 
very seldom to be met with in the sculls of 
savages, or of brute animals. It is hardly 
possible therefore that they should have pre- 
existed in the organic germ: and yet they are 
as perfect bones as any others of the head, 
having true, and well formed sutures. The 
sutures of these bones are not always locked 
|P_55
in with the sutures of the other bones of the 
head; but it often happens, that they are so 
numerous, and so thick together, that those 
in the middle evidently construct their own 
ones. What is there however which exhi- 
bits more art than the structure of a true 
suture; its double, nay treble row of teeth, 
the corresponding depressions, and the asto- 
nishing manner in which they are clasped 
together? 

The conclusion which naturally follows, 
is, that if perfect bones, new and preter- 
natural joints, new organized and vascular 
membranes can be formed, where there was 
no ground for supposing a pre-existing germ, 
what necessity is there for this doctrine of 
envelopement? 

But the phenomena which occur in the 
generation of mules, so completely resute all 
our ideas of pre-existing organic germs, that 
one is at a loss to imagine, how, after a due 
attention to this subject, such a theory should 
|P_56
have found any serious abettors. I should 
suppose that a single experiment, such as that 
of Mr. Koelreuter, who by repeatedly produ- 
cing prolific bastard plants, transformed one 
species of tobacco (nicotiana rustica) into 
another (nicotiana paniculata) so completely, 
that it had not the smallest resemblance to its 
maternal parent; that such an experiment, I say 
must cure the most partial advocate for the 
theory of evolution, of his error. This 
excellent observer, by artificially impregna- 
ting the first species of tobacco with the farina 
of the last mentioned, obtained prolific bastard 
seeds from it, and with the plants which sprung 
from these, he repeated the same experiment, 
impregnating them with the farina of 
the Nicotiana paniculata. As the plants 
which he procured from the seeds of this last 
combination, differed more from the original 
maternal plant, he repeated the same process 
with it, and proceeded to do so with every new 
offspring, untill he obtained six plants, which 
in every respect appeared perfectly similar to 
the paniculata; so that in the classical work, 
|P_57
in which he gives a narrative of this, he 
appears perfectly justifiable in entitling it, A 
complete metamorphosis of one natural species of 
plants into another.

I know perfectly well, that the favour- 
ers of the theory of evolution endeavour to 
explain the production of bastards, or mules, 
by saying, that the male semen, besides its 
stimulating power of awakening the female 
germs from their state of stupor, and inactivi- 
ty; also ascribe to it certain formative powers, 
by which the germ may be altered in a certain 
degree, so as so resemble the father a little. 
But what in the name of Heaven is such a 
subterfuge than the silent acknowledgement of 
the insufficiency of the germ theory, and of 
the necessity of having recourse to formative 
powers, in order to extricate it? If these 
formative powers, however, are so strong as 
totally to change the structure and appear- 
ance of the maternal germ, and that in the 
course of a few generations, it is rather diffi- 
cult to conceive the utility of such a theory. 

|P_59
[}SECT. III.
Proofs of the Formative Nisus, and an Attempt to ascertain some of its Laws. }]
IT is easier to overturn, than to establish a 
theory; and the reproach has been often 
applied to old reformers, that they have suc- 
ceeded better in attempts of the first, than of 
the last kind. Yet what Mons. Bonnet ex- 
cellently remarks on this subject may be very 
true [/31./], that the detection of an error is often 
of greater consequence than the discovery of 
|P_60
a new fact. In this respect therefore, I trust 
the present sheets will at least be allowed 
some merits, since they point out the defects 
of a late beloved, and almost universally 
adopted theory. I hope, however, at the 
same time, that the one which I give in 
its place will be found more agreeable to what 
we observe in nature. 

No one can be more fully persuaded of 
the immense gap which exists between the 
organised, and unorganised, between the ani- 
mated, and the inanimate world, than I am; 
and although I have the greatest respect for 
the penetration of those who discover a 
gradual scale of ascent and descent in the 
works of nature, yet I confess I am at a loss 
to guess how they make it pass from organic 
to inorganic bodies. Such a reflection, how- 
ever, ought by no means, to deter us from em- 
ploying the phenomena of either of these 
classes of bodies for explaining the phenomena 
of the other: and so far do I consider it as 
an argument, not of the least importance, for 
|P_61
proving the existence of the Formative Nisus 
in organic bodies, that even in the inorganic 
ones there exists traces of a Formative Power; 
not of a Formative Nisus however, at least, 
in the sense this word is used in this work; 
for here it is considered as one of the pro- 
perties of the living principle, and conse- 
quently not to be imagined as belonging to 
dead matter: but that this last Formative 
Power is demonstrated by the regularity and 
invariable shape of certain bodies which we 
find to be formed of it. 

For only to adduce one or two instances, 
we find nothing more elegant, than certain 
metallic crystallizations, which as to their 
external aspect, bear so striking a resemblance 
to certain organized bodies, that they become 
a very good example for explaining to us the 
manner in which bodies are formed from rude 
and unorganized matter. Such for instance, 
is that species of native dendritical silver, 
imbeded in a matrix of quarz from Mexico, 
Farnkrautsilber, and which resembles the fo- 
|P_62
liage of the fern, or to name something more 
common, that undescribable beautiful moss- 
looking texture of brass, which is observed 
in breaking a piece of it, after the first 
fusion. 

These as I have already said, are ad- 
duced as mere examples of the existence of 
a Formative Principle in unorganized bodies. 

And now for the true formative effort in 
the animated world. 

I know no means so well calculated for 
rendering the existence, and activity of this 
nisus evident to an impartial eye, as to ob- 
serve the origin and progress of such orga- 
nized bodies, which increase so rapidly in 
bulk, that the action of the growth becomes 
almost evident; and which are of so delicate 
and semitransparent a texture, as to be capable 
of being evidently seen through with the as- 
sistance of a microscope, and a due degree of 
light. 

|P_63
The vegetable kingdom supplies us with 
a very good example of this kind, in the 
simple production of a most simple water 
plant, (conferva fontinalis) which is com- 
monly to be met with every spring, in wells, 
ponds, and springs, or in the wooden pipes 
through which water flows. 

The whole plant consists of a single 
uniform straight fine thread, of a bright 
green colour, and about half an inch in 
length, and whose under extremity is generally 
inserted in a bed of slime. As these threads, 
however, are extremely numerous, and grow 
very close together, they look like a very fine 
fur of the most beautiful green colour, with 
which considerable spaces of the places above 
mentioned are sometimes covered. 

I have attentively observed the propaga- 
tion of this water plant in the beginning of 
the spring, and to me it appeared to take place 
in the following manner. The upper end 
|P_64
of the fibrile began gradually to swell, and 
divide into a number of small round points, 
which at last disengaged themselves from the 
parental thread, and in the number of some 
thousands, attached themselves to the sides 
of the glass in which I made the experiment. 
Soon afterwards, these round bodies began 
to shoot out a small point, which almost 
visibly lengthened till they had acquired their 
due size. All this took place in the space of 
twice twenty-four hours, counting from the 
first moment that the end of the old thread 
began to swell. 

Both the rapid growth of this plant, 
and its transparent texture, afforded me means 
of discovering not only its structure, but also 
the slightest changes that took place in it. 
This kind of moss is equally simple inter- 
nally, as externally; and under the strongest 
magnifying powers, and by the best light, 
we can discover nothing else than a fine ve- 
sicular appearance, like a green froth, sur- 
rounded by a very thin delicate membrane. 

|P_65
But in spite of the distinctness of texture 
of the little green points which adhered to 
the sides of the vessel, there was nothing to 
be seen like the germ of an enveloped filament 
in them, such as was soon to be produced from 
it: but only when the little round body had 
attained a certain degree of perfection, a small 
shoot seemed to spring out of it, in such a 
manner, that its act of evolution seemed to be 
promoted merely by that part of the vesicular 
texture of the round point, which was most 
contiguous to the filament, passing gradually 
over to it. As the filament encreased in 
length, the little round body gradually de- 
creased in magnitude, and became of a paler 
colour, so that at last, when the filament had 
arrived at its full growth, there remained just 
a perceptible swelling at the inferior end, and 
which served as a root to the new filament. 

With an equal degree of distinctness 
with which the progress of the Formative 
Nisus of this plant becomes conspicuous, we 
can also clearly discover it in many animals; 
|P_66
especially in such, as like this kind of moss, 
possess the advantages of a rapid growth, and 
great transparency of texture. This is the 
case with the armed polypi, which on account 
of the miracles they are capable of performing, 
have within these last forty years been an object 
of general surprise, and admiration. All the 
known species of this animal have a kind of 
gelatinous body, which, whether it be of a 
green, yellow or brown colour, &c. is still 
sufficiently transparent to be capable of being 
distinctly seen through, if a proper lens and 
light be employed. Its texture is uniform, 
and simple, and so homogenous, consisting en- 
tirely of gelatinous points, which seem to be kept 
together by a still thinner jelly, that nothing 
seems concealed from or obscured to the eye of 
the observer. Now, when this animal is about 
to produce its young, a swelling or tumefaction 
takes place on a single spot of its body; and 
from this swelling there shoots out first the 
cylindrical body, and then the tentaculæ of 
the young polypus. These are all of so con- 
siderable a size as to be observed with the 
|P_67
naked eye: and when we consider this cir- 
cumstance, and all the others already mention- 
ed, there does not appear the smallest probable 
ground for supposing, that an organized germ 
had pre-existed there, and was now evolving. 

I refer it to the internal feelings of 
every one who has attentively observed this 
kind of production in animals, and plants of 
so simple a texture as those alluded to, and 
who at the same time have well attended to 
all the arguments brought forward in the fore- 
going fection against the doctrine of the 
pre-existence of the embryo of the chick in 
the yolk of the egg, whether in passing in 
his own mind to the generation of the more 
perfect or warm-blooded animals (as for 
instance by the most accurate investigation of 
the phenomena of the beginning, progress, and 
form of the embryo in the fecundated egg, and 
also of the many other parts [/32./] which are 
never 
|P_68
to be found in the unfecunded one) whether, 
I say, his conviction leads him to believe in 
the pre-existence of enveloped organic germs; 
or, in the existence of a nisus, by which a new 
being is formed from the unorganized mate- 
rials of generation. 

All the arguments which have hitherto 
been deduced from the phenomena of genera- 
tion in support of the existence of a Nisus 
Formativus, gains new, and additional weight 
from the consideration of the phenomena of 
reproduction; this so wonderful power of 
organised bodies by which lost, and mutilated 
parts are again renewed. 

Generation, and reproduction are both 
modifications of one, and the same power; 
the last being nothing else than a partial 
repetition of the first. Whatever tends to 
elucidate the one, must therefore throw light 
on the other. 

|P_69
I have frequently repeated the experi- 
ments alluded to in the First Section, by 
which I endeavoured to discover the power 
of reproduction in the green armed polypus, 
and have constantly met with the same suc- 
cess. The little mutilated animal was always 
diminished in bulk, in proportion as its new 
arms or new body were pushed out. It be- 
came evident with what efforts nature hastened 
to renew the determinate form of the maimed 
animal, and also, that from the short period 
of time, and the improbability of the polypus 
having taken a sufficient quantity of nourish- 
ment to supply materials for the new mem- 
bers (since all wounded polypi eat less than 
usual); From these circumstances I say, it 
became evident, that owing to the force of 
the Formative Nisus with which the parts 
were endowed, the remaining portion of 
the mutilated animal, was in some degree, 
converted into the new members, and thus 
the disturbed structure renewed. 

|P_70
I am well aware, that the advocates for 
the theory of Evolution, will, in order to 
help themselves out of this difficulty, have 
recourse to an hypothesis, which of all im- 
probable ones, may be stiled the most ro- 
mantic, and improbable; and according to 
which it is supposed, "That in every part of 
the polypus, there exists innumerable germs 
enveloped, and torpid as it were, which 
lie like a hidden store, untill it shall please 
the fancy of a naturalist to rouse them 
into action, and free them from their state 
of imprisonment, by the enlivening cut of 
a pair of scissars. "

Now, let any one compare this expla- 
nation with the naked appearances which take 
place in the above, and many other experi- 
ments on the armed polypus, the process of 
which are so easy to be discovered.—I shall 
at present content myself with relating two of 
these experiments. When we take the half 
of two polypi of different kinds, for instance, 
|P_71
the anterior half of a green one, and the pos- 
terior half of a brown one, and bring them 
together at the bottom of a proper glass, they 
join together, and form in this manner, one 
of these monsters of mythology, representing 
a group composed of different parts of different 
animals. 

According to the theory of Evolution, 
however, very different phenomena must have 
occurred. Instead of this junction between 
the two halves, each one ought to have 
evolved from an organic germ that part of 
which it had been deprived of; but this is not 
what we observe; it was more natural that 
the two parts should join by the means of 
their formative powers, than that each of 
the halves should of itself have been metamor- 
phosed to a complete animal by the manner 
described above. 

There is a well known experiment how- 
ever, which is admirably calculated to de- 
monstrate both the improbability of the sup- 
|P_72
posed pre-existing germs, and at the same 
time, the activity of the Formative Nisus.
When we take the polypus, and do not divide 
it in pieces, but merely slit open its belly 
longitudinally, so as to destroy that cavity; 
and as it were, metamorphose the shape of 
the animal from a cylindrical to a flat form; 
instead of a number of organic germs being 
set free from the cut edges, and of their being 
each evolved, one of the two following oc- 
currences takes place; either the animal rolls 
itself together in the usual form, so that the 
edges of the wound meet and coalesce, or 
if it remains like a piece of flat tape, it begins 
soon after to swell in the middle, as if it were 
blown up, and there is gradually formed within 
it a new belly. 

In both these cases there is no occasion 
for new materials, all that is done is a mere 
reparation of the disturbed structure.

In man and other warm-blooded animals 
the power of reproduction is much more li- 
|P_73
mited; not only on account of the great diversity 
of materials of which they are composed, but also 
the different quantity of living principle peculiar 
to each of these materials, and by the mutual de- 
pendance and action which they exercise on 
each other. And yet we often observe in them 
evident marks of this power of reproduction, 
tending to confirm all that has been said on this 
head, concerning the polypus; nails have been 
observed to grow on the stump of a finger, even 
although the first joint was completely lost [/33./]
It would be rather a bold conjecture to suppose 
that nature had foreseen such accidents, and had 
therefore sown all the fingers and toes with the 
organic germs of nails, &c. And on the 
contrary, how agreeable to nature is it to 
deduce the whole phenomenon from the 
activity of the formative powers, whose efforts 
are sufficiently strong to reproduce nails on the 
extremities of the fingers, nay even in un- 
usual parts. 

|P_74
Another equally well known, and inter- 
esting fact of this kind, is, where nature en- 
deavours to supply the loss of an extremity, whose 
complicated structure it would have been 
difficult for her to restore, by the production 
of a more simple and uniform substance. 
Thus, that celebrated surgeon, Morand, gives 
the description of a hare, which, a considerable 
time before its death, had had one of its fore 
legs shot off, the place of which nature 
had endeavoured to supply with a kind of bony 
stump, which, although not like the original, 
quoad materiem, yet resembled taliter qualiter 
quoad forman[/34./]. 

If, as I flatter myself, the few phenome- 
na of generation, and reproduction already 
taken notice of, are sufficient to prove the un- 
|P_75
deniable existence of the Formative Nisus,
there remain many others tending to explain 
its modus operandi; and to ascertain some of 
the laws by which that mode seems to be 
regulated. I look upon the following to be 
of this kind, that is, as the mere result of 
undoubted observation. 

I. The activity of the Nisus, is, in an 
inverse ratio, to the age of the organized body.

For however certain it may be, as has been 
formerly remarked, that some time is neces- 
sary before the first marks of the new conceived 
fruit becomes visible, yet it is equally well 
ascertained, that after this interval, the forma- 
tion proceeds with astonishing celerity. 

In general, the embryos of the earlier 
months are represented in a very unshapely 
form, but this may be owing either to the 
person who gives the representation; or to 
this, that such abortions generally suffer much 
by external violence, are squeezed, compressed, 
|P_76
or from putrefaction having already begun, 
lose much of their uncommon elegance, which 
otherwise render them objects of admiration. 
I possess some of these beautiful human fœtusses 
of the first months of pregnancy, especially 
those which I received from my dear friend 
Mr. Bückner of Gotha, where in one of five 
weeks old, and of the size of a common bee, 
all the features of the face, every singer com- 
plete, every toe, and the organs of generation 
were to be distinctly seen. 

Now this early activity of the Formative 
Nisus, is by no means confined to the external 
form of the embryo, but is still more remark- 
able in the internal structure. I have often 
been astonished at the early perfection of the 
vicera, which I have discovered in dissecting 
recent human embryos of the first months. 
Thus, merely to mention one circumstance 
in its head, which was hardly larger than a 
pea, the whole cartilaginous basis cranii, with 
all its depressions, apertures, and processes, 
were marked in the most sharp and distinct 
|P_77
manner, although, indeed, there was not the 
smallest point of ossification, either in the 
sphenoid bone, or the petrous part of the 
temporal one. 

However difficult it may be on the sup- 
position of pre-existing germs, to explain 
what becomes of them for so long a time after 
they arrive at the place of their destination, 
and are fecundated and stimulated to evolu- 
tion; it is equally difficult to imagine, why 
immediately after this interval, they should 
so suddenly acquire so respectable a size. On 
the contrary, after it has been fully understood, 
what was said concerning the time necessary 
for the preparation of the fluids of generation, 
before the Formative Nisus takes place; 
there remains nothing puzzling in this, 
that then the new awakened action should so 
soon form the ground work of the new 
animal. 

That the inverse ratio between the For- 
mative Nisus, and the increase of age, 
|P_78
continues even after birth, is proved by the 
remarkable ease with which reproduction takes 
place in very young animals, especially those 
of the lizard kind, as in the common newt. 

II. The Formative Nisus is much more 
active in the embryos of mamelia, than in 
those of oviparous animals.

In the chick for instance, the first ap- 
pearance of the ribs is observed one hundred 
and twenty-nine hours after impregnation. 
This period is equal to the nineteenth week 
of gestation in, the human species. But I 
have in my possession, human fœtusses, which 
are not more than six weeks old, and yet in 
which, the cartilaginous rudiments of the 
ribs are to be distinctly discovered. It would 
appear as if nature made greater haste with 
the formation of viviparous animals, to secure 
them against deformity, from acccidental 
causes, such as pressure, external violence, 
&c. from which causes all oviparous animals 
are defended by their shell. 

|P_79
III. In the formation of some particular 
parts of any organized body, the Formative 
Nisus is much more regular in its process, than 
in that of others. Thus the brain, says old 
Conr. Vict. Schneider, a man much distin- 
guished in physiology, is seldom or never found 
to deviate from the usual structure [/35./]. On 
the contrary, how great and frequent are the 
variations in many other parts, such as in the 
kidneys, and Thoracic Duct, &c. 

Amongst the many deviations of the 
formative process from its usual course, these 
are principally to be mentioned. 

1st, Where one species of organic body 
takes on the action of that of another.

To this belong some of the most unac- 
countable phenomena in nature, which, as 
|P_80
far as I am able to judge, cannot be explained 
in any satisfactory manner by the theory 
of pre-existing germs. It is a well-known 
fact, that women have in general, and ac- 
cording to the strict laws of nature, only 
one uterus for the reception of the new con- 
ceived fœtus. But that most of the other fe- 
males in the class of mamalia, have a double 
one. Yet instances are not wanting, where 
a real uterus bicornis has been found in women. 
This singularity, if I am not mistaken, is 
accounted for by the previous reflection. In 
the same manner, I would reckon all those 
hares, which have been so frequently ob- 
served with small horns like those of deers, 
and also many of those strange deviations, 
which take place now and then in the struc- 
ture of the vegetable kingdom, such as the 
alder-tree with oak leaves, described by 
Gleditch [/36./]

|P_81
2dly, Where the organs of generation of 
one sex take on more or less the structure of 
that of the other.

In our sceptical day, the possibility of 
human hermaphrodites, and that of other 
warm-blooded animals, has been much doubt- 
ed. And yet Baron Haller of this university, 
and Mr. John Hunter of London, have in- 
stituted, and given relations of the most care- 
ful dissections of such animals, especially in 
the cow, and goat tribes, and which leave no 
room for further doubts in this matter. It is 
true, that in none of the instances, the most 
essential parts of generation, for instance, 
the male testicles, and female ovaria, were to 
be distinctly discovered in the same individual. 
But though the chief form seemed to be always 
that of one of the sexes, yet there was evidently 
to be discovered in one part or another, the 
most unequivocal, though imperfect marks of 
the organs of the other sex. In general, the 
male organs lay internally, whilst the external 
ones had more the resemblance of the female. 

|P_82
3dly, When the formative process does not, 
as in the former instances, take an action which 
is FOREIGN, but one that is completely 
PRETERNATURAL to the individual.
And yet from an attentive consideration of 
the astonishing uniformity, which reigns 
amongst the different kinds of monsters, it 
would appear as if the causes of the deviation 
in their formation, was regulated by certain 
fixed laws. Whoever has seen any consider- 
able number of monsters, or only looked into 
the loose and wretched compilations of re- 
presentations of them, can hardly have escaped 
being struck by the resemblance which unites, 
even to the most inconsiderable parts, cer- 
tain species of them, so that the individuals of 
that species, seem as if they had all been cast 
in the same mould. 

To conclude, there is still one other 
phenomenon, which the reader is at liberty to 
explain, either on the principle of pre-existing 
|P_83
organic germs, or that of the Formative 
Nisus. Many animal monsters, such for in- 
stance, as those with two bodies and a single 
head, are of that kind, according to the ex- 
press assertion of Baron Haller, and other 
evolutionists, that they cannot have arisen 
from the accidental growth of two germs, but 
that the fault lies in the original monstrosity 
of a single germ. Now it is singular, that 
such monsters are only common in animal, 
which have been domesticated, and that they 
are never, or at least seldom to be heard of 
in their wild state. Can the Author of nature 
have ordained it, that from amongst the in- 
volved germs of any one species of animals, 
for instance, swine, the monsters should ar- 
rive at evolution, just when taken under the 
care of men, and that the monsters should be 
produced only by the tame, and not by the 
wild also? 

On the other hand, there is nothing un- 
reasonable in supposing, that after the sub- 
jection of these animals, their whole frame 
|P_84
and œconomy suffer a very great change; 
that then the Formative Nisus deviates in 
some degree from its original laws, and there- 
fore these animals as they degenerate into 
endless varieties, are also more subjected to 
monstrosity. 

Such, in my opinion, are the principal 
observations and experiments which serve to 
prove the existence of the Formative Nisus, 
and to ascertain some of its laws; observations 
which have drawn my conviction more and 
more from the system of involved germs, and 
confirmed my belief in the very opposite doc- 
trine, which I have endeavoured to establish. 

FINIS. 
