
|P_
AN
ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION 
OF THE
HUMAN GRAVID UTERUS, 
AND
ITs CONTENTs. 

|P_
[}AN
ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION 
OF THE 
HUMAN GRAVID UTERUs, &c.}]
[}SIZE OF THE UTERUS. }]
THE pregnant uterus undergoes such gradual changes, from the 
time of conception to the hour of delivery, that in giving the 
anatomy of this part it will be necessary to fix upon some one 
time in the wide period of nine months. The latter part of that 
period appears to be the fittest for our purpose, on many accounts, 
but especially because the fruit of the womb is then come to its 
full perfection, bears examination better, and all the minute 
organization is become more the object of sense and experiment. 
We shall therefore be supposed to be speaking of the uterus as it 
is in the ninth month, except the contrary be particularly ex- 
pressed. 

The common size of the pregnant uterus may be understood 
by casting the eye over the first, second, fourth, eleventh, and 
|P_2
thirteenth plates. [/1./] To be more particular upon the size of the 
uterus would answer no useful purpose. And that the difference 
in a number of instances will be very considerable, may be readily 
imagined, when we reflect that the uterus very commonly con- 
tains a child and placenta, at least twice as large in one case as 
it does in another, and frequently at the least six or eight times 
more water: besides the variety of size from there being one 
child only, or twins, &c. 

The size of the uterus appears to depend upon the quantity of 
the liquor amnii principally; for though women who have twins, 
or a very large child, are commonly observed to be very big, yet 
the greatest number of those who are really very much swelled 
out, are so only from a vast quantity of water. In such cases 
there is frequently but one child, and that very often a small one. 

|P_3
[}FIGURE OF THE UTERUS. }]
The general figure of the uterus is oviform; the fundus 
answering to the largest extremity of the egg, and the cervix 
and os uteri to the small end: but the fundus is larger and more 
flat, or less pointed, in proportion to the lower extremity of the 
uterus, than one end of an egg is to the other; and the whole 
uterus seems more or less compressed, so as to be broader from 
right to left, than it is from the fore part backwards. Besides 
these more constant deviations, the figure of the uterus differs 
from the regular oviform, from a variety of accidental causes, 
as it adapts itself to the neighbouring parts, to the attitude of the 
body, and to the position of the contained child. In order to 
conceive these varieties more easily, we must remember that in 
most cases the uterus is not so completely filled as to be upon the 
full stretch. Were it out of the body, and filled artificially, it 
would easily contain more than it actually does. Thus the uterus, 
like a bladder of water not quite full, is plastic, and moulds itself 
into various shapes from accidental circumstances. 

As the surrounding parts resist the pressure or weight of the 
uterus unequally, according to their different natures, the uterus 
swells out in some places, while in others it is pressed inwards. 
Thence it is, that the brim of the bony pelvis has commonly the 
|P_4
effect of a belt girding that part of the uterus, and the projections 
of the spine, and of the psoæ and iliac vessels, mould the outside of the 
uterus into corresponding cavities. 

That the different attitudes of the mother's body should pro- 
duce alterations in the figure of the uterus, needs not now a par- 
ticular explanation or proof. The weight of the uterus itself, and 
of the adjacent viscera, being differently directed, must produce 
some change in the form of the uterus corresponding to every 
change of posture, especially as the parts against which the 
uterus will rest its weight, in the different postures of the body, 
are of such different natures. 

The same plastic state of the uterus makes it adapt its figure 
to the circumstances of the child within, and vary as those change. 
We not only in dead bodies see the parts of the child making a 
variety of different projections on the outside of the uterus; but 
in the living body, all the same variety is frequently manifest to 
the touch, in examining the outside of the abdomen. The round 
projecting ball made by the child's head or buttocks, is commonly 
very perceptible, and in many instances smaller projecting parts 
are so distinctly felt through the containing parts of the abdomen, 
as to leave no room to doubt of their being knees or elbows. The 
most extraordinary instance which has come to my knowledge, 
of the uterus shaping itself to its contents, was a case of twins 
which Dr. Mackenzie shewed to me, and which, with many other 
|P_5
curious and useful observations, which an indefatigable diligence 
in his profession had furnished him with, it is to be feared are 
already in some measure lost to the public. In this case, the twins 
with their involucra and waters, did not make one compacted 
oval body as usual, but the uterus had stretched into two distinct 
bags for containing the respective twins; so that upon the out- 
side of the uterus there was a notch dividing it into two apart- 
ments, as deep and distinct, in proportion, as the base of the heart 
represented on cards. 

In several cases I have observed the uterus to stretch unequally 
in the corresponding opposite parts; so that one half, either right 
or left, has been considerably larger than the other. And in two 
cases I found the anterior part of the uterus much more swelled 
out than the posterior, so that the distance from the insertion of 
one Fallopian tube to the other, measured much less upon the 
back part than upon the fore part of the uterus; and in some cases 
the reverse has been as evident. 

The human uterus, in the unimpregnated state, commonly has 
one triangular cavity. In many instances it is found subdivided, 
at its upper part, into two lateral cavities, so as to resemble the 
two horns of the uterus in a quadruped. several specimens of 
such uteri are preserved in my collection. That peculiarity will 
perhaps explain the unequal extension of the two sides, right and 
left, in some instances of pregnancy; and may likewise explain 
|P_6
this very singular case of twins which Dr. Mackenzie met with: 
we need only to suppose that the uterus had originally been sub- 
divided into two horns, and that each ovarium had furnished a 
fœtus, which was deposited in the respective side or horn of the 
uterus, as in the quadruped. 

Upon the whole, we may say that an egg is no more like the 
form of the human uterus, than a cylinder like the beautifully 
varied figure of the trunk of the human body. It must be ob- 
served likewise, that the cavity does not always correspond with 
the outward figure of the gravid uterus. In one instance which 
I met with in a dead body, and still preserve, and in another, 
which I was very sensible of in a living woman, a part or band of the 
inner stratum of the flesh of the uterus had not stretched 
in the same degree with the rest, but made a considerable par- 
tition internally; a circumstance which might have increased the 
difficulty, as well as the danger of rudely turning the child, or 
taking away the placenta with the hand. 

|P_7
[}SITUATION OF THE UTERUS. }]
The small or lower end of the uterus is placed in the cavity of 
the pelvis. This generally contains the greater part of the child's 
head, and fills up the cavity of the pelvis so completely, as to 
press the vesica urinaria against the symphysis pubis, and the 
rectum against the hollow of the sacrum. The os uteri is directed 
against the coccyx, or the lower part of the sacrum. The body 
and fundus of the uterus, which for the most part contains all 
the rest of the child and the placenta, is so placed in the anterior 
part of the abdomen, from the brim of the pelvis upwards to the 
epigastric region, as to be under and before all the other bowels in 
immediate contact with the parietes abdominis, occupying the 
whole space from one hip bone to the other, and a proportionable 
space from these bones upwards as far as the epigastric region. 
The common situation of the uterus will be perfectly understood 
by looking at plate first, second, third, and fourth. 

When the uterus rises up from the cavity of the pelvis into the 
hypogastric and umbilical regions of the abdomen by its increas- 
ing bulk, it is no wonder that it should instantly mount up before 
the small intestines. Their attachment to the loins by the me- 
sentery, would seem to render this necessary; but there is an- 
other cause which co-operates towards this effect, and which 
|P_8
almost as certainly prevents the epiploon from falling down 
before the uterus, though that membrane is naturally so loose, 
that we might conceive it to be spread out indifferently either 
before or behind the body of the uterus. Yet in fact this fatty 
membrane is commonly found pushed up by the uterus, and 
crowded all round the fundus uteri, with the small intestines in 
the epigastric and adjacent parts of the hypochondriac regions. 
The cause of all this would appear to be the specific lightness of 
those parts in comparison of that of the uterus. The intestines 
contain some air, and the epiploon a good deal of oil, which gives 
them lightness, and buoys them up above the uterus. 

Whoever has any tolerable notion of the shape of the abdomen, 
and situation of the cavity of the pelvis, must understand that 
the axis of the uterus is very far from the perpendicular line, its 
lower end being turned backwards, and its upper end in propor- 
tion turned forwards. This obliquity changes with the attitude 
of body, and from many other causes. When erect, the weight 
of the uterus presses the fore part of the abdomen into a greater 
rotundity, and then the axis of the uterus approaches nearest to 
the transverse or horizontal line; and in a recumbent posture, the 
contrary happens from a similar cause. 

In the case of a first pregnancy, the uterus stretches itself 
higher up in the epigastric region, and its axis comes nearer to 
the longitudinal or vertical direction, because the parietes of the 
|P_9
abdomen do not easily give way, and do not swell forwards in 
any great degree; but in a woman who has had many children 
there is a more loose and pendulous abdomen, and thence the 
uterus does not shoot upwards, but rather forwards, and takes 
more of the transverse situation. This oblique direction of the 
uterus approaching to the transverse, is more remarkable in very 
short women; because in them the chest is so near the pelvis 
that the uterus is stopt in its ascent, and forced to shoot forwards. 
The same thing happens, and for a like reason, when the pelvis is 
very narrow. For in this case the uterus must be higher, as 
no part of it can be lodged in the cavity of the pelvis. In a 
very short and crooked woman, with a very narrow pelvis, upon 
whom I saw the Cæsarian section performed, from a concur- 
rence of the abovementioned causes, the fundus uteri was 
turned not only forwards, but even a little downwards. As she 
lay upon the table, the navel and upogastrium could not be 
seen; the navel being situated on what might have been called 
the posterior and inferior part of the abdominal tumour. And to 
expose that part of the abdomen to the surgeon, it was necessary 
with two assisting hands to lift up the fundus uteri, or the most 
prominent part of the abdomen; without which the hypogastric 
region would have been inaccessible. Indeed, it was an appear- 
ance which, without having seen it, I should never have conceived. 

The obliquity of the uterus towards the right or left side is 
not commonly, indeed cannot be, very considerable. When it 
|P_10
is of such a size as to possess the whole, or nearly the whole 
space between the hip bones, and its lower extremity is fixed 
down to the pelvis, how is it possible that it should be turned 
very considerably to one side? A small degree of lateral obli- 
quity is very common; and it is natural to suppose that in a 
reclined posture, the middle projection of the lumbar vertebræ 
will throw a little more than one half of the uterus into the lateral 
cavity between the spine and one hip bone. In fact, we know 
that in all the last months of utero-gestation the abdomen is 
often more full on one side than on the other. Women say in 
such a case, that the child lies on one side; and they judge 
rightly. Where the child lies, the bulk must both be more con- 
siderable and more permanent; but where there is only uterus, 
placenta, and water, the swelling will be softer, and project less. 

When the child lies more in one side than in the other, I 
have frequently observed that the limb of that side is weaker, 
more benumbed, and more liable to cramps and oedematous swell- 
ings. That an awkward position of the child will occasion 
spasms in the limb, experience testifies with the clearest evi- 
dence. Many women feel that the one depends upon the other; 
and from particular motions of the child, can certainly prognos- 
ticate ease or pain till it shall alter its situation again. 

As far as I have been able to observe, the mere obliquity of 
the uterus never occasions so difficult a labour, as to require any 
|P_11
artful management to bring the os uteri into a proper situation. 
In such cases, as in many others, art can do little good, and pa- 
tience will never fail. 

Whoever understands the figure and situation of the uterus 
in the last months of gestation, will see that in that period a 
case of pregnancy may commonly be distinguished from other 
swellings of the abdomen, by outward examination alone. The 
flatulent softness, and, when struck, the peculiar sound of the 
bowels round the uterus, the circumscribed tumour which the 
uterus forms, and the unequal resistance which it makes when 
you press upon the child, or upon the waters, are commonly, all 
taken together, so characteristic, as hardly to leave an expe- 
rienced and attentive examiner in doubt. 

|P_12
[}OF THE LIGAMENTS, TUBES, AND OVARIA, OF THE 
PREGNANT UTERUS. }]
It is a common observation, that the ligaments and tubes of 
the pregnant uterus are attached lower upon the side of the 
uterus than they were before pregnancy. If the reason of this 
has not been so generally known, it is nevertheless evident. 
The peritonæal coat of the uterus makes the broad ligament on 
each side, much in the same manner as the analogous membrane 
of the intestinal tube makes the mesentery. When a woman is 
not pregnant this ligament is of considerable breadth, the sper- 
matic vessels pass between its two laminæ, the round ligament 
runs downwards, and outwards, on its anterior surface, and the 
tube runs in loose serpentine turns upon its upper edge. 

But in proportion as the circumference of the uterus grows 
larger, the broad ligaments grow narrower, their posterior la- 
mella covering the posterior surface, and their anterior lamella 
covering the anterior surface of the uterus itself. As a proof of 
what has been said, we observe that the round ligaments do not 
now run down on the fore part of the broad ligaments, but upon 
the fore part of the body of the uterus itself; a proof, I say, that 
the peritonæum, which covers the uterus at this part, is the very 
membrane which before pregnancy made the anterior lamella of 
|P_13
the broad ligament. Farther, in proportion as the fundus uteri 
rises upwards, and increases in size, the upper part of the broad 
ligament is so stretched that it clings close to the side of the 
uterus, so that in reality the broad ligament disappears, no more 
of it remaining than its very root; viz. its upper and outer 
corner, where the group of spermatic vessels pass over the iliacs 
immediately to the side of the uterus. In this state, though 
the small end of the tube opens into the same part of the uterus, 
as before impregnation, yet the tube has a very different di- 
rection; instead of running outwards in the horizontal direction, 
 it runs downwards, clinging to the side of the uterus. And be- 
hind the fimbriæ lies the ovarium, for the same reason, clinging 
close to the side of the uterus. The fimbriæ and ovarium are 
commonly placed upon the iliac vessels, or fleshy brim of the 
pelvis, behind the group of spermatic vessels. 

The round ligaments run almost perpendicularly downwards 
from the fundus uteri to their passage through the muscles; 
they are considerably enlarged in thickness, and are so vascular, 
that when injected, they seem to be little more than a bundle of 
arteries and veins. Their arteries are all convoluted. Both 
their arteries and veins are branches principally of the spermatics, 
and both evidently anastomose with their respective external 
vessels in the groin, or upper part of the labia. Even in this en- 
larged state of the round ligaments, it is very difficult to say how 
they terminate in the groin; they appear to be insensibly lost. 

|P_14
The tubes are more fleshy, vascular, and soft in their sub- 
stance, and are less convoluted than in the unimpregnated state. 
The fimbriæ and internal rugæ are larger and much more 
beautiful, especially when their vessels are well injected. 

The ovaria seem to have undergone no remarkable change, 
except that one which contains the corpus luteum; which for 
the most part can be distinguished by a rounded fullness, and frequently a considerable prominence, sensible both to the sight 
and touch, upon the middle of which there is a small pointed ca- 
vity or indentation like a cicatrix. Upon slitting the ovarium 
at this part, the corpus luteum appears a round body, of a very 
distinct nature from the rest of the ovarium. sometimes it is ob- 
long or oval, but more generally round. Its centre is white, with 
some degree of transparency; the rest of its substance has a 
yellowish cast, is very vascular, tender, and friable, like glandu- 
lar flesh. Its larger vessels cling round its circumference, and 
thence send their smaller branches inwards through their sub- 
stance. A few of these larger vessels are situated at the cicatrix 
or indentation on the outer surface of the ovarium; and are 
there so little covered, as to give that part the appearance of 
being bloody when seen at a little distance. When there is 
only one child, there is only one corpus luteum; and two 
in case of twins. I have had opportunities of examining the ova- 
ria with care in several cases of twins, and always found two 
corpora lutea. In some of these cases there were two distinct 
|P_15
corpora lutea in one ovarium; in others, there was a distinct 
corpus luteum in each ovarium. In a variety of different cases, 
I have found that the sex of the fœtus has no relation to the 
corpus luteum being in the right or left ovarium. 

[}OF THE THICKNESS OF THE UTERUS. }]
Those who say that the uterus grows thicker in the same 
proportion that its bulk is increased, have probably been de- 
ceived by examining the uterus of a woman who died some 
hours or days after delivery. In that contracted state the ute- 
rus is often found even two inches thick; but in all those which 
I have examined, in the natural distended state, though there 
was some difference, the thickness of the uterus was but a little 
more considerable than before impregnation. When not in- 
jected, its more common thickness is from one to two-thirds of 
an inch; when its vessels, and particularly its veins, are pretty 
well filled with wax, its thickness is thereby considerably in- 
creased, more especially where the placenta is fixed, on account 
of the number and size of the vessels at that part. For this 
reason only, perhaps, the uterus is thickest at that part, and for 
|P_16
this reason too it is commonly thicker towards the fundus than 
near the cervix. In respect of thickness, I have observed a good 
deal of variety, and such inequalities in the same uterus, that 
even where the placenta did not adhere, the uterus has been al- 
most twice as thick at one part as at another. I have always ob- 
served in opening the uterus, that its thickness is more consider- 
able than one could have imagined it to be by feeling it exter- 
nally, where there is a fluctuation of the water. Its substance is 
so soft, that the fluctuation then felt is like that of water in a 
thin bladder. 

[}OF THE BLOOD VESSELs OF THE UTERUS. }]
There is no circumstance in which the gravid uterus differs 
more from the unimpregnated, than in the size and termination 
of its vessels. The arteries, both spermatic and hypogastric, are 
very much enlarged. The hypogastric is commonly consider- 
ably larger than the spermatic, and we very often find them of 
unequal sizes in the different sides. They form a large trunk 
of communication all along the side of the uterus; and from 
|P_17
this the branches are sent across the body of the uterus, both be- 
fore and behind. The cervix uteri has branches only from the 
hypogastrics, and the fundus only from the spermatics; or 
in other words, the hypogastric artery gives a number of branches 
to the cervix, besides sending up the great anastomosing branch, 
and the spermatic artery supplies the tube and fundus uteri 
before it gives down the anastomosing branch on the lateral 
parts of the uterus. All through the substance of the uterus 
there are infinite numbers of anastomosing arteries, large and 
small, so that the whole arterial system makes a general net-work, 
and the arteries are convoluted, or serpentine, in their course. 
Hardly any of the larger arteries are seen for any length of way 
upon the outside of the uterus. As they branch from the sides, 
where they first approach the uterus, they disappear by plung- 
ing deeper and deeper into its substance. 

The arterial branches which are most enlarged, are those which 
run towards the placenta, so that wherever the placenta adheres, 
that part appears evidently to receive by much the greatest 
quantity of blood; and the greatest number both of the large 
and small arteries at that part pass through the placenta, and are 
necessarily always torn through upon its separation. 

The veins of the uterus would appear to be still more enlarged 
in proportion than the arteries. The spermatic and hypogastric 
veins in general follow the course of the arteries, and like them, 
|P_18
anastomose on the side of the uterus. From thence they ramify 
through the substance of the uterus, running deeper and deeper 
as they go on, and without following precisely the course of the 
arterial branches. They form a plexus of the largest and most 
frequent communications which we know of among the vessels of 
the human body. And this they have in common with the ar- 
teries that their larger branches go to, or rather come from, that 
part of the uterus to which the placenta adheres; so that when the 
veinous system of the uterus is well injected, it is evident that 
that part is the chief source of the returning blood. Here too, 
both the large and small veins are continued from the placenta to 
the uterus, and are always necessarily broken upon the separation 
of these two parts. The veins are without valves, and are there- 
fore easily injected. In injecting them, we observe that at first 
they become turgid, and project on the outer surface of the uterus; 
but in proportion as we throw a greater quantity of wax into 
these vessels, they grow more flat and obscure; because the uterus 
itself becomes more filled and tense, which has the effect of com- 
pressing the veins that run in its substance. As I know no reason 
for calling the veins of the uterus sinuses, and as that expression 
has probably occasioned much confusion among the writers upon 
this subject, I have industriously avoided it. 

|P_19
[}OF THE LYMPHATICS. }]
Mr. Cruikshank is the first who observed at this school of ana- 
tomy the lymphatics in the gravid uterus; he also injected them 
with mercury, and traced them with great success in several sub- 
jects. They are more numerous, and many of them larger than 
could have been imagined; from which it is manifest, that a co- 
pious absorption is carried on in the uterus towards the mother. 
The lymphatics pervade its substance universally; its peritonæal 
coat appears, like that of a calf's spleen, to be interwoven with a 
crowded plexus of these vessels; and where they get to the sides 
of the uterus, when filled with mercury, some of them are even 
larger than a goose-quill. some are remarkably varicose, or en- 
larged at particular places. They pass from the sides of the 
uterus, many with the spermatic vessels, but the greater number 
and the larger with the hypogastrics. Of these last, some pass into 
glands on the side of the vagina; others meet with no glands 
till they have reached the side of the pelvis, where they run into 
the glands of the iliac plexus, or shoot backwards into the glands 
of the sacral plexus; from both of which they pass into the lum- 
bar plexus, where they are lost among the absorbents of the lower 
extremities, and the external parts of generation. 

Besides the lymphatic vessels of the uterus, there are others, as 
we hinted above, belonging to the ovaria and Fallopian tubes, 
|P_20
which follow the course of the spermatic arteries and veins. They 
anastomose with the lymphatics of the uterus, and terminate in 
glands which are placed upon the sides of the lumbar vertebræ, 
near the origin of these blood vessels. Here they become mixed 
with the lymphatics of the lumbar plexus, and enter along with 
them into the lower end of the thoracic duct. The spermatic 
lymphatics enlarge during pregnancy in the same manner as the 
blood vessels; and for this reason they are then both most readily 
seen and injected. 

The reason why the blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves of 
the ovaria and the Fallopian tubes, have their origin in the loins, 
is the same with that of the origin of similar vessels and nerves in 
the male. The ovaria and Fallopian tubes are not placed in the 
cavity of the pelvis in the early foetal state, but upon the psoæ 
muscles, some little way under the kidneys. It is natural, there- 
fore, that their vessels and nerves should arise near the vessels 
and nerves of these organs. 

|P_21
[}OF THE NERVES. }]
I cannot take upon me to say what change happens to the system 
of uterine nerves from utero-gestation but I suspect them to be en- 
larged in some proportion as the vessels are. Upon this occasion 
we profess only to give the anatomy of the gravid uterus; yet 
since the descriptions of the nerves of the uterus which I have 
read, seem to me unsatisfactory, I shall so far go beyond my sub- 
ject as to describe the hypogastric nerves, such as they appeared 
to me in a female subject carefully dissected for that purpose. 
All the uterine nerves come from the intercostals, and pass in the 
form of plexuses with the blood vessels, as in the other 
abdominal viscera; so that there is a spermatic and hypogastric plexus of 
each side attending the vessels of the same name. They are prin- 
cipally the branches of two large cords of the intercostals, which 
run down before and on each side of the aorta in the abdomen, 
much in the same manner as the trunks of the intercostals run 
down upon the sides of, and behind, that artery. On the left side 
this large cord comes down from the semilunar ganglion, partly 
as a continuation of the anterior cord of the intercostal from that 
part where it is forming the semilunar ganglion, and partly as a 
plexus of nervous filaments coming down more forwards from 
the ganglion itself. This cord passes down before the beginning 
of the renal artery, all along the side of the aorta. In its way it 
|P_22
receives branches from the intercostal, and gives off branches, so 
that it has the appearance of a plexus, though the principal cord 
can always be distinguished. 

It gives off the renal plexus, which is situated upon the side 
of the uppermost vertebra lumborum, and passes to the sinuosity 
of the kidney, behind the renal vein; but both before, and behind 
and above, and below, the renal artery. 

Opposite to the third vertebra lumborum, the cord gives off 
two pretty large branches, and some small filaments of nerves, 
which run down with and before the spermatic artery. This 
spermatic plexus may be distinctly traced, with the artery, into 
the ovarium and adjacent parts, at the upper part of the broad 
ligament. 

Immediately below the origin of the spermatic plexus, oppo- 
site to the same third vertebra lumborum, two large branches 
come from the trunk of the intercostal nerve, in the common di- 
rection of these communicating branches; viz. forwards, down- 
wards, and inwards, which join the great cord, and make it larger 
from this conjunction downwards. 

On the right side the cord comes down from the semilunar 
ganglion, close to the root of the superior mesenteric plexus and 
artery, giving a few branches only to the renal plexus, and runs 
down on the right of the aorta, as the other on the left. 

|P_23
And on the right side the renal plexus, which comes chiefly from the semilunar ganglion, as it passes towards the kidney, behind the vena cava and renal vein, the renal plexus, I say, sends down the spermatic plexus behind the beginning of the renal, which soon joins and passes with the spermatic vessels of this side. 

The two cords, right and left, may be said to constitute a lum- 
bar plexus all along the aorta, which makes the basis of the 
plexuses which accompany the branches of that artery; or they 
may be considered as the anterior cords of the intercostals in the 
abdomen. 

At the upper part of the fourth vertebra lumborum, the right 
cord gives down a considerable branch with the iliac artery, 
which branching, forms a kind of sheath-like plexus upon the ar- 
tery in its way to the groin. 

At the bifurcation of the aorta, the right and left cord unite 
upon the fore part of the aorta, and make a plexus from that part 
directly downwards as far as the lower part of the fifth vertebra 
lumborum, and then finally divide into what we may call the 
right and left hypogastric nerve. 

On the right side a pretty large branch comes from the trunk 
of the intercostal, on the side of the fourth vertebra lumborum, 
|P_24
which passing downwards, and inwards behind the right iliac ar- 
tery, joins the plexus of the two united cords before the last ver- 
tebra lumborum. 

The hypogastric nerve passes round the side of the pelvis, be- 
tween the peritonæum and the hypogastric vessels, and upon the 
inside of the ureter. At the middle of the side of the pelvis, where 
the hypogastric vessels divide, the nerve splits into a double 
range of branches; viz. posterior and anterior. 

The posterior range goes to the side of the rectum, some 
branches passing to the back part, and others to the fore part, of 
the gut; and the first and uppermost of those branches are ma- 
nifestly reflected upwards upon the gut, directing their course to- 
wards the colon. 

The anterior range of branches is the largest, arid may be con- 
sidered as the continuation of the trunk of the hypogastric nerve, 
in the form of a plexus. Where the hypogastric vessels are pass- 
ing to the side of the uterus and vagina, this nerve, situated be- 
hind them, spreads out in branches like the portio dura of the 
seventh pair, or like the sticks of a fan, with many communica- 
tions which are sent to the whole side of the uterus and vagina. 
The uppermost branches pass upwards, in the duplicature of the 
broad ligament, towards the fundus uteri. The branches, as 
they go to lower parts of the organ, pass less obliquely, then 
|P_25
horizontally, and the lowest of all run downwards on the side 
of the vagina. The greatest crowd or number of these branches 
go to the os tincæ, and the adjacent parts of the uterus and 
vagina. 

[}OF THE MUSCULAR FIBRES OF THE UTERUS. }]
The substance of the uterus is rendered remarkably soft and 
loose in its texture by pregnancy; so that when an incision is 
made into it, the wound can easily be made to open wide; or if 
a narrow piece of the uterus be cut quite out through and through, 
it is so loose and ductile, that it can be readily drawn out to at 
least double its natural thickness. This laxity appears to depend 
on two causes, viz. the great quantity of large vessels in its com- 
position, and the loose connection between the fasciculi of its 
fibres. It would seem probable that utero-gestation enlarges the 
cellular connecting membrane, as well as the vessels of the uterus. 

When we speak of the muscular fibres, it is difficult to treat 
the subject with precision. We neither know their external 
appearance, nor their internal composition. They only manifest 
|P_26
themselves to our senses, when numbers of them are collected 
into bundles, and make what we commonly call muscular fasci- 
culi. In living bodies they manifest themselves by motion in the 
part, which we suppose is produced by a contraction or accurta- 
tion of the fibres themselves; but that change in the nature of a 
muscular fibre, which is the cause of its contraction, is not known. 
This contraction in some parts is voluntary, in others is involun- 
tary, and in some it is both. In some parts it is quick, and in 
others very slow. The motion which is actually observed in the 
uterus of living women, is involuntary and slow. It is com- 
monly believed to be muscular motion, and the fibres peculiar to 
the substance of the uterus are believed to be muscles. In the 
quadruped, the cat particularly, and the rabbit, the muscular ac- 
tion, of the peristaltic motion of the uterus, is as evidently seen 
as that of the intestines, when the animal is opened immediately 
after death. In many parts, particularly of the internal surface 
of the uterus, these fibres have the same striking fasciculated ap- 
pearance which we observe in common muscles; yet they are of 
a paler colour, and appear to me to be of a harder texture. When 
we know more of the nature of muscular fibres, we shall perhaps 
be able to account for this variety. I have taken considerable 
pains to trace the arrangement of the uterine fasciculi, but except 
upon its inner surface, I have observed nothing but irregularity 
and confusion. On the inner surface itself, I have observed some 
variety, and always where the placenta adheres, a good deal of 
irregularity. 

|P_27
In a woman who died seven days after delivery, I gave up the 
uterus to this pursuit, and examined the fibres very carefully. I 
stretched it gradually in warm water, then inverted it, to have a 
full view of its inner surface. The remains of the decidua had 
been melted down, and passed off with the lochia, so that the 
fasciculated stratum of muscular fibres appeared to be bare, and to 
make the internal surface of the uterus. In a great number of 
places, but particularly where the placenta had been fixed, the 
fasciculi left oval spaces between them for the passage of ar- 
teries and veins, somewhat like those separations in the tendi- 
nous fibres of the abdomen and loins, where vessels pass out to 
the cellular membrane and integuments. The cervix uteri, where 
the penniform rugæ are situated, had not such regular nor so 
large fasciculi as the rest of the uterus. In the body of the uterus 
the fibres were very regularly circular. The fundus was made up 
of two concentric circular plains of fibres, at the very centre of 
which was the orifice of the Fallopian tube. The better to con- 
ceive this arrangement of the internal muscular fibres, we may 
suppose each corner of the fundus uteri, where the tube is in- 
serted, to be stretched or drawn out, so as to make two horns, or 
a bifid fundus, as in the quadruped; then if we understand the inner 
fibres to be circular in every part of the uterus, we understand 
clearly how they will be circular in the human uterus upon its 
body, and likewise circular and concentric at each corner of the 
fundus. 

|P_28
When this internal stratum was removed, the fasciculated ap- 
pearance and regular direction of the fibres was less and less 
apparent, in proportion as I dissected outwards; which seemed 
in a great measure to be owing to the infinite number of the 
branches and communications of the large veins. 

The outer stratum in general was firmer and less vascular; 
that is, had fewer large vessels, and therefore was more dense 
than the middle and inner stratum. But the lateral parts of the 
uterus, where both the spermatic and hypogastric vessels first 
come to it, and anastomose upon its outside, are excepted in this 
general observation. 

I afterwards had the most favourable occasion that could be 
desired, for examining the fibres upon the inside of the uterus. It 
was the uterus of a woman who died at the end of the ninth 
month, without being in labour, and without having any flood- 
ing or discharge of waters. When I had examined and taken out 
all the contents, I attended particularly to the internal surface of 
the uterus. I found it every where covered with a thin stratum 
of the decidua, through which the muscular fibres appeared, but 
with some degree of obscurity. Upon rubbing off this tender 
membrane with a cloth, it gave me pleasure to see how exactly 
the above description agreed with the appearances. And it is my 
opinion, that whenever a fair opportunity for examination presents 
|P_29
itself, it will be found more accurate to say, that there are two 
than that there is one musculus orbicularis in fundo uteri. 
Ruysch's figure will be found to be a tolerable representation of 
either, and the orifice of the Fallopian tube will appear in the 
centre of each. 

[}OF THE MOUTH OF THE UTERUS. }]
The mouth of the uterus differs considerably in the different 
times of utero-gestation. For the greatest part of the nine 
months, that is, till the cervix uteri be fully distended, there is a 
projection of both the anterior and posterior lip of the os tincæ; 
and in some women this continues till the very time of labour. 
But in most women, when they are at their full time, or very near it, 
the os uteri is flat, and makes only a small rugous hole, 
often not readily discoverable by the touch on the lower or pos- 
terior part of the rounded lower end of the uterus. The border 
of this orifice, and the internal surface of the uterus, for an inch or 
more all around, is full of little irregular cavities. These contain 
a tough gluten, which shoots across, and plugs up the inner 
|P_30
part of the orifice. This gluten is commonly squeezed out from 
all the lacunæ, by the dilatation of the os uteri in the beginning 
and progress of the labour; and so losing its hold, it falls out. In 
the dead body, when the part is kept some days in water, the 
gluten swells out more and more from all these cavities, and then 
separates entirely. Then the innumerable lacunæ which con- 
tained it being empty, are very visible. And if the gluten has 
been thus carefully taken away, and be floated in water, its exter- 
nal surface is seen beautifully ornamented with all the processes 
which were drawn out of the innumerable lacunæ. 

|P_31
[}OF THE CONTENTS OF THE PREGNANT UTERUS. }]
The contents of the pregnant uterus are the secundines, liquor 
amnii, and the fœtus. The secundines make the lining of the 
uterus, and the immediate covering of the child; they form the 
chain of connection and communication between the bodies of the 
mother and child, and carry on that wonderful influence upon 
which the life and health of the child depend. There is an obvi- 
ous division of them, into the navel string, the placenta, and the 
membranes. 

A peculiarity in the secundines with regard to their substance 
is likewise very obvious. They are all more or less gelatinous 
and transparent; and there is no manifest fibrous texture in any 
part of their substance. Their texture is adapted to the tempo- 
rary purpose which they serve. 

Another peculiarity in the secundines is, that there is not any 
appearance of fat in them, let the mother or child be ever so 
|P_32
adipose, at any period of utero-gestation, neither in the sound or 
natural, nor in the morbid state of parts. What, upon a careless 
examination, appears to be fat upon the inner surface of the pla- 
centa in many cases, is an accumulation of a substance somewhat 
like a tough jelly, with an opaque and yellowish cast; and what 
often appears like slender ramifications of fat upon the outer sur- 
face, in reality is not fat, but ossifications in that part of the de- 
cidua. 

The navel string is a cord made of three large vessels twisted 
together, which at one end is fixed to the child's navel, and at the 
other to the placenta. It passes, through the liquor amnii, from 
the child to the rest of the secundines. It is sometimes little more 
than a foot in length, and sometimes even more than four feet 
long. Its more common length is about two feet. When very 
long, it is generally entangled round the child's neck. I have 
known it turned four times and an half round the neck. I can 
hardly say that I ever saw an instance of a natural labour being 
in any degree retarded or rendered difficult by the shortness of 
the navel string, or by its being twisted in coils round the child's 
neck. The probable reason for the latter is, that in such cases 
there is a proportionable redundancy of length in the string, 
which we may suppose had lain in convolutions at the depending 
part, and that the child's head gavitating to the same place, had 
thereby insinuated itself into the centre of the coils, and so given 
them an opportunity of slipping over it, and of being caught, in 
|P_33
labour at least, upon the neck. Where a child is turned indeed 
by the hand of an operator, the navel string will often be so en- 
tangled as to occasion real difficulties. The thickness of the navel 
string is likewise various, not only from the vessels being full of 
blood, or empty, but from the different size of the vessels them- 
selves, and more especially from the different quantity of the ge- 
latinous substance which connects them. In some it is only of the size of a small finger, in others it is thicker than a large thumb. 

The three vessels of the navel string are two arteries and a vein. 
I have seen several cases where there was only one artery, and it 
was always in proportion larger. I never saw two veins: in 
cases of a single umbilical artery, I had supposed that the two 
hypogastrics of the fœtus had united at the navel to form one 
trunk; but in one fœtus of this kind which we dissected, the hy- 
pogastric artery of one side was not reflected to the navel, but 
produced only such branches as remain pervious in the adult. 
The umbilical vessels give off no visible branches till they come 
to the placenta. There the two arteries anastomose, commonly by 
a cross canal, nearly of the size of one of the arteries. 

There is a great variety in the twisting of the vessels of the 
navel string. sometimes they are uniformly and closely twisted, 
like a rope, in their whole course; and sometimes they run al- 
most quite straight and parallel, especially in that part of the 
|P_34
string which is towards the placenta; for near the fœtus it is almost always more or less twisted. In some navel strings there is great irregularity from solitary turnings of particular vessels, commonly called knots, as we see in twisting a cord where some of the constituent threads are longer, and therefore looser than others. The end of the navel string which is next the placenta is always less twisted, and more uniform than the end which is towards the fœtus. 

Whatever be the cause, in most which I have attended to, the 
twisting of the navel string has been in the same direction, viz. 
such as would be produced in turning the child round upon the 
navel as a centre, by pushing its head towards the right side and 
its feet to the left. In two-and-thirty preparations now before me 
four only are twisted the contrary way; and of the twenty- 
eight which are twisted in the common way, three have the con- 
trary twist, for some inches, at the extremity which was towards 
the fœtus. The coat or covering of the navel string, which has 
a smooth or polished surface, is composed of the united mem- 
branes amnion and chorion, and is almost inseparably joined 
with the parts which it incloses. The ligament which goes from 
the bladder of the fœtus to its navel, between the umbilical arte- 
ries, commonly called the urachus, or its remains, grows more 
slender as it passes along. In the navel string it is hardly per- 
ceptible, except near the fœtus. It is like a fine thread, a little 
more white and opaque than the rest. When you have found it 
|P_35
near the fœtus, by taking a little pains you may trace it sensibly 
almost the whole length of the string. Mr. Cruikshank first ob- 
served this to me. Besides the vessels, the remains of the urachus, 
and coat of the navel string, I have observed nothing in its compo- 
sition but a fine cellular substance loaded with a transparent ropy 
fluid, which gives the part both firmness and bulk. By touching 
the cut surface of the fresh navel string, and removing the finger 
slowly, we see the fluid so tenacious and ductile, as to be drawn 
out into fine threads some inches in length. If the navel string 
be kept some days, its fluid loses entirely that glutinous quality, 
and transudes like water; for which reason the string becomes 
then supple, and loses greatly of its bulk. In this state, if a small 
blow-pipe be pushed into the interstices of the vessels, and proper 
ligatures be made, the whole intersticial substance may be ren- 
dered emphysematous and white, like a piece of inflated fresh 
lungs. In this condition it may be dried, and then cut up to shew 
more distinctly the cellular substance. The great variety that is 
observed in the thickness or size of the navel string in different 
parts and in different cases, depends principally on the quantity 
of the cellular substance, and not on the bulk of the child. 

The winding course of the vessels in the navel string we may 
presume, prevents their being much affected by any stretching 
force, and the firmness of the intersticial substance protects them 
against dangerous compression. These accidents might otherwise 
perhaps have occasioned frequent mischief, especially where there 
|P_36
is a large child, and a small quantity of the liquor amnii. In such 
a case the navel string passing under the arm or ham, or in the 
groin, might have been compressed so as at least to have pre- 
vented the return of the veinous blood. The same thing might 
have easily happened in those cases where there is actually a knot 
formed upon the navel string, while the child is in the womb; 
and that such a case sometimes happens I can hardly doubt. If I 
have not been deceived, I have twice seen it. 

[}OF THE PLACENTA. }]
The placenta and the membranes together, make one complete 
unimperforated bag, which lines the uterus, and contains the 
child. The placenta is thick, fleshy, and exceedingly vascular; 
the membranes are thin, pellucid, and for the most part have 
scarcely any apparent red blood vessels. 

The figure of the placenta is commonly round and flat, about 
an inch in thickness, and a span in breadth. It becomes gradu- 
ally thinner all around at its edge, so as to render the change 
|P_37
from the placenta to membranes more imperceptible. The above 
mentioned thickness of the placenta is meant of the common 
flaccid state in which we usually see it; but when its cellular 
part is well filled with wax, or any fluid, the placenta is at least 
two inches thick. Though its figure is generally round, it is of- 
ten oblong or triangular, or of an irregular shape; and some- 
times it has a small lobe or two, separated and entirely distinct 
from the rest. I have seen it oblong and narrow in the middle, 
like the cipher 8, or like the common placentæ of twins united 
by an isthmus. When the placenta is very long and narrow, and 
the navel string is inserted near one end, it is apt to remain in 
the uterus a considerable time after the birth of the child, and to 
occasion flooding and faintness before it comes away. 

The outer surface which adheres to the womb, and is therefore 
naturally convex, is rough, tender in its substance, commonly 
covered with blood, lightly subdivided into smaller constituent 
lobes, and, to a common observer, seems to have no apparent 
blood vessels, at least none of any considerable size. 

Its internal surface, naturally more or less concave, is glossy, 
hard or compact in its texture, and beautifully marked with the 
ramifications of the umbilical vessels. The navel string, which 
produces these branching vessels, is inserted sometimes into the 
very centre, but more commonly a little nearer the edge, and of- 
ten into the very edge of the placenta. In at least four different 
|P_38
cases, I have seen the navel string terminate on the inside of the 
membranes, at the distance of five or six inches from the placenta. 
In all these cases the umbilical vessels parted from one another 
even to considerable distances in their course upon the membranes, 
and came to the edge and inner surface of the placenta at different 
places, even at the opposite parts. The termination or insertion 
of the navel string, wherever it happens to be, makes the centre 
of ramification for the large vessels on the internal surface of the 
placenta. 

Commonly there is only one centre; but in those cases where 
a navel string attaches itself to the membranes, there are just so 
many centres of ramification as there are trunks of large arteries 
or veins coming separately to the edge of the placenta. The in- 
ternal surface of the placenta is covered with the membranes am- 
nion and chorion, and the external with the decidua; of which 
hereafter. 

The following peculiarity I have often observed in the pla- 
centa. Upon its inner surface, at more or less distance from the 
extreme border, there is a projecting brim, of the whitish colour of 
pleuritic blood, which gives a hollow dish-like appearance to the 
inside of the placenta. The membranes go off from this brim, 
and the circumference of the placenta is remarkably thick, form- 
ing a convex surface (part of the outer surface of the placenta) 
instead of a thin edge. 

|P_39
In considering such a placenta, it would be natural to suppose 
that there had been a cell or recess in the uterus corresponding 
to the outward convexity of the placenta. I will not pretend to 
explain this peculiarity, because it never occurred in any instance 
where I saw the placenta still adhering to the uterus. Perhaps it 
will be found to happen, when the ovum attaches itself near one 
of the Fallopian tubes, in those women who have the uterus di- 
vided at its fundus into a right and left sinuosity, corresponding 
to the horns of that organ in a quadruped. I have observed that 
such placentæ part from the uterus after labour with more diffi- 
culty, requiring a good deal of patience and cautious assistance; 
and frequently after all, the chorion and decidua are found to be 
torn from the placenta all around, and left, or a portion of them 
at least, adhering to the uterus. 

The human placenta, as well as that of quadrupeds, is a com- 
position of two parts intimately blended, viz. an umbilical or in- 
fantile, and an uterine portion. One is a continuation of the 
umbilical vessels of the fœtus; the other is an efflorescence of the 
internal part of the uterus. 

The umbilical portion of the placenta is of a simple nature, 
consisting of a regular ramification of the arteries and veins of the 
navel string into smaller and smaller branches, without any la- 
teral anastomosis, so that when unravelled by gentle putrefac- 
tion, motion, and washing, this part takes on the appearance of a 
|P_40
tree whose branches divide to almost infinite minuteness, not 
only towards its outer surface, but every where through its sub- 
stance. 

The two umbilical arteries anastomose freely by a canal of 
communication just where they are going to branch out upon 
the placenta, sp that by injecting one of them, the other is readily 
filled also. Every branch of an artery is attended with a branch 
of a vein; these cling to one another, and frequently, in the sub- 
stance of the placenta, entwine round one another as in the navel 
string. 

Much has been said, or supposed, about a communication be- 
tween these vessels and those of the uterus; but from all the ex- 
periments I have made upon the human subject (and upon qua- 
drupeds likewise), it plainly appears that the umbilical arteries 
terminate in the umbilical veins, and not in the vessels of the 
uterus; and that the blood passes from the arteries into the veins, 
as in other parts, and so back to the child again. If the placenta 
be whole in all its substance, which is seldom the case, and its 
blood vessels be pretty well emptied of their blood, any subtile 
injection thrown into an artery will fill the arterial system through 
the whole substance of the part to an amazing degree of minute- 
ness, and return so freely by the veins as to fill them very gene- 
rally and equally. In the same manner the whole umbilical sys- 
tems may be filled by injecting the vein, the fluid returning from 
|P_41
the veins into the arteries. In both these experiments the in- 
jected fluid is confined to the umbilical vascular system, none 
escaping at the external surface of the placenta, neither by large 
nor small orifices, whether of veins or arteries. 

After common labours the placenta is generally more or less 
torn, and its vessels contain a quantity of coagulated blood; on 
both of which accounts it is unfit for a successful injection. I 
have generally taken care, by a previous management, to procure 
a favourable subject, and would recommend the same method to 
those who have the opportunity, viz. when the navel string is 
tied and cut, not only allow the end of the string to bleed from 
the placenta, but milk it continually till the placenta comes down 
into the vagina; and in taking that away, be slow, cautious, and 
gentle, leaving it principally to the gradual pressure from the 
mother, and very gentle pulling by the navel string. Thus it will 
neither be bruised nor torn; and it will be almost empty of 
blood. Instantly put it into a bason of warm water, with the 
inner surface upwards. What blood remains in the vessels will 
still be fluid enough to be pressed from those on the surface of the 
placenta into, and then along the vessels of the string. Then turn 
up the external surface, wash and press it very gently, and clear 
it of all coagula, either upon its surface, or in the venal orifices; 
and the whole will be almost without blood. 

|P_42
When a placenta is finely injected, and then steeped, and fre- 
quently washed in clean water, it is evident that the umbilical 
injected vessels do not reach even the outer surface of the pla- 
centa, but are only seen through a membrane (decidua) which 
covers all that surface. It is rough or ragged, like the inner sur- 
face of the uterus, to which it adheres, and by its whiteness be- 
comes very distinct from the vascular injected part of the placenta, 
over which it is spread. It becomes still more distinguishable 
when the part is put into spirits, which render it more opaque 
and whiter. 

This membrane is an efflorescence or production of the inner 
membrane of the uterus, and is analogous to the uterine fungi of 
quadrupeds. It receives no vessels demonstrable by the finest in- 
jections from those of the navel string, yet it is full of both large 
and small arteries and veins. These are all branches of the ute- 
rine vessels, and are readily filled by injecting the arteries and 
veins of the uterus; and they all break through in separating the 
placenta from the uterus, leaving corresponding orifices on the 
two parted surfaces. 

This decidua, or uterine portion of the placenta, is not a simple 
thin membrane expanded over the surface of the part; it pro- 
duces a thousand irregular processes which pervade the substance 
of the placenta, as deep as the chorion or inner surface; and are 
every where so blended and entangled with the ramifications of 
|P_43
the umbilical system, that no anatomist will perhaps be able to 
discover the nature of their union. While these two parts are 
combined, the placenta makes a pretty firm mass; no part of it 
is loose or floating. But when they are carefully separated, the 
umbilical system is evidently nothing but loose floating ramifi- 
cations of the umbilical vessels, like that vascular portion of the 
chorion which makes part of the placentula in a calf; and the 
uterine part is seen shooting out into innumerable floating pro- 
cesses and rugæ, with the most irregular and most minutely sub- 
divided cavities between them that can be conceived. This part 
answers to the uterine fungus in the quadruped. 

In a placenta of nine months, I have never been able to sepa- 
rate the two constituent parts otherwise than by some degree of 
putrefaction, and gentle rubbing and washing; but this operation 
always destroys the uterine portion, which is more tender, and 
melts down by putrefaction sooner than the other. In the pla- 
centa of an earlier age, the union of the two constituent portions 
is less intimate, and they may both be preserved very entire, like 
the vascular chorion and fungus in the quadruped. I did this 
operation in a conception of four months, and still preserve the 
uterine part attached to the inside of the uterus. I wished to 
give a figure of it, but the processes were so irregular and so 
changeable, while floating in water, that the painter could not 
express them; and when taken out of water, they collapsed into 
a smooth membranous appearance. 

|P_44
These two portions of the placenta are so interwoven with one 
another as to leave innumerable small vacuities, with free com- 
munications, through the whole substance. If this cellular struc- 
ture be inflated or injected, the placenta, like the corpora cavernosa 
penis, acquires a very considerable increase of thickness, and sub- 
sides again when the fluid escapes. This cellular receptacle in the 
placenta, cannot be completely filled after it has been parted from 
the uterus, because then the fluid, which we may by any con- 
trivance throw in, will be discharged at innumerable orifices on 
the outer surface of the placenta; but while it remains attached 
to the uterus, all the cells may be easily and completely filled by 
injecting any fluid into the arteries or veins of the uterus. These 
vessels, and these only, have a demonstrable communication with 
the spongy cells of the placenta, which receive the maternal blood 
from the arteries of the uterus, and give it back into the veins of 
that part. Both these vessels pass in the decidua, and the larger 
branches of both, with little or no ramification, terminate abruptly 
in the cells. 

The arteries are all much convoluted and serpentine; the 
larger, when injected, are almost of the size of crow-quills. The 
veins have frequent anastomoses, pass in a very slanting direction, 
and generally appear flattened; some of them are at least as big 
as a goose-quill, and many of them are very small. 

|P_45
All around at the very edge of the placenta, there are a great 
number of these veins; and many of them run a little way, in the 
direction of tangents to the circle, in the very angle between the 
membranes and the placenta. When they have been filled by in- 
jection, while the placenta and membranes adhere to the uterus, 
and in that state are seen from the inside through the amnion and 
chorion, many of them appear evidently to collect their smaller 
branches from the adjacent parts of the decidua and of the uterus, 
and throw their trunks into the placenta; as if there were a dis- 
position for bringing venal blood into the spongy cavities of the 
placenta, from the decidua and inside of the uterus all round the 
placenta. 

In separating the placenta from the uterus, which is commonly 
practicable with the least imaginable force, all these vessels are 
necessarily torn through; and then each broken vessel has an 
open mouth upon the inner surface of the uterus, and a corres- 
ponding orifice on the outer surface of the placenta. 

Notwithstanding the disputes still subsisting among anato- 
mists, whether any blood vessels pass between the uterus and 
placenta, and though the texture of these vessels be so exceed- 
ingly tender that they break with the least force, they are as de- 
monstrable in a proper subject as any vessels in the body, not 
only by injections, but in a fresh subject, without any artificial 
preparation. And any anatomist who has once seen and under- 
|P_46
stood them, can readily discover them upon the surface of any 
fresh placenta; the veins, indeed, he will find have an indistinct 
appearance from their tenderness, and frequent anastomoses, so 
as to look a good deal like irregular interstitial void spaces: the 
arteries, which generally make a snake-like convolution or two 
on the surface of the placenta, and give off no anastomosing 
branches, are more distinct. The best time for seeing them is as 
soon as the placenta comes away in a common labour. Let its 
surface be instantly washed with clean water, that all the loose 
blood may be removed. This renders the ground (the decidua) 
lighter coloured, and for that reason makes the vessels, which will 
still contain some dark blood, more conspicuous. 

If a blow-pipe be thrust into the substance of the placenta any 
where, the air which is blown into the cellular part opens and 
rushes out readily by the open mouths both of the arteries and 
the veins. 

While the placenta remains adhering to the uterus, any injec- 
tion made by the uterine arteries fills not only these vessels, but 
also the cellular part of the placenta; and if we continue the 
operation, the injection returns from these cells into the veins of 
the uterus, and fills them likewise. The same thing happens, but 
in an inverted order, when we begin by injecting the veins of 
the uterus. 

|P_47
Thence it is, that in injecting the gravid uterus, if we fill one 
system of uterine vessels fully, we can hardly afterwards get the 
injection to run any length of way in the other system. There- 
fore when we wish to have both systems pretty well injected, we 
must fill the first only moderately, and then the other. And 
when the arteries and veins of the uterus have been filled in this 
manner with wax of different colours, we observe, in examining 
the placenta, that the wax which was thrown into the first sys- 
tem (the arteries for example) is driven towards the inside of the 
placenta by the wax which was last thrown in by the other sys- 
tem, and which for that reason lodges itself principally in those 
cells of the placenta which are next to its outer surface. 

While the placenta and membranes adhere to the uterus, make 
a slit into the coat of the navel string; there introduce a blunt 
probe, and force it into the cells of the adjacent part of the pla- 
centa; then withdrawing the probe, insinuate an injecting-pipe, 
and tie it firmly with a broad thread round the navel string. 
You will then find that you can by that pipe fill the whole pla- 
centa uniformly in its cellular part, and likewise all the veinous 
system of the uterus and decidua, as readily and fully as if you 
had fixed the pipe in the spermatic or hypogastric vein; so ready 
a passage is there reciprocally between the cells of the placenta 
and the uterine vessels. It is as much reciprocal, and more largely 
open, than between the corpus spongiosum and the veins of the 
penis. 

|P_48
From all these experiments and observations, which have been 
often repeated and diligently attended to, with no other desire 
than to discover truth, it seems incontestible that the human pla- 
centa, like that of the quadruped, is composed of two distinct 
parts, though blended together, viz. an umbilical, which may be 
considered as a part of the fœtus, and an uterine, which belongs 
to the mother; that each of those parts has its peculiar system 
of arteries and veins, and its peculiar circulation, receiving blood 
by its arteries, and returning it by its veins; that the circulation 
through these two parts of the placenta differs in the following 
manner; in the umbilical portion the arteries terminate in the 
veins by a continuity of canal, whereas in the uterine portion 
there are intermediate cells into which the arteries terminate, 
and from which the veins begin. 

Though the placenta be completely filled with any injection 
thrown into the uterine vessels, none of the wax finds its way 
into any of the umbilical vessels; and in the same manner fluids 
injected into the umbilical vessels never can be pushed into the 
uterine, except by rupture or transudation. 

The first time, in the year 1743, that I injected the vein of 
the navel string, while the placenta adhered to the uterus, in se- 
parating these two parts, it was evident that the injection had 
no where passed farther than the placenta, except at one place, 
where a small convoluted vessel (no doubt an artery) was traced, 
|P_49
distinctly filled with wax, some little way in the substance of the 
uterus; but upon examination, it was evident that there was ex- 
travasation in that part of the placenta. And by many trials I 
know that water, or any fluid fit for transudation, thrown into 
the umbilical arteries or veins, readily gets into the cellular ca- 
vities of the placenta, and thence into the vessels, especially the 
veins of the uterus. 
