

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
DOMESTIC MIDWIFE; 

OR, 

THE BEST MEANS 

OF

PREVENTING DANGER

IN

CHILD-BIRTH,

CONSIDERED. 

[^A long horizontal double-line.^]
BY 
 MARGARET STEPHEN, 
TEACHER OF MIDWIFERY TO FEMALES, 
NO. 42, ELY-PLACE, HOLBORN. 
[^A long horizontal double line.^]

LONDON: 

PUBLISHED BY S. W. FORES, PICCADILLY. 

1795. 
[^A short horizontal line that is thicker in the middle.^]
Price One Shilling and Six-Pence. 
|P_
[^A long horizontal double-line.^]

[}INTRODUCTION. }]
[^A short horizontal line that is thicker in the middle.^]
AS there is nothing in creation which 
(so far as we know) so much engages 
the care and attention of the Creator, as 
the happiness and welfare of the human 
species, so there is nothing of so great 
importance, as that those creatures, on 
whom He has impressed his own image, 
should be safely introduced upon the great 
theatre of the world; and although God 
gave laws to nature for the performance 
of this work, yet He has not confined 
these laws within such strict bounds, that 
they cannot err: no, moral deformity has 
introduced some degree of physical distor-
tion among our race; which needs no 
greater proof than a comparison of the 
dialogue between the Almighty and Eve, 
with daily experience in child-birth. 

|P_9
For this, and many other good reasons, 
he gave us knowledge and understanding, 
which enable us to mitigate, or remove by 
art, many of the evils, to which our nature 
subjects us. In no instance, can our 
knowledge and skill be more importantly 
engaged, than in the preservation of mo-
thers and children in the hour of parturi-
tion. 

From the beginning of time, until the 
middle of the last century, the art of mid-
wifery was committed to the hands of 
females, nor did men ever think it their 
province; they no doubt considered it a 
great violation of females' modesty, to 
interfere with them at a season, when 
nature teaches even some of the brute 
creation to seclude themselves from public 
view. As there were no men-midwives in 
the world for near six thousand years, it 
can be no stretch of imagination to suppose, 
that God furnished women with the powers 
of preserving each other in bringing forth 
their offspring; for when the midwives of 
Egypt (because they feared God) would 
not comply with Pharoah's dreadful mandate, 
|P_10
we do not find that he applied to men-
midwives to effect his purpose; a thing he 
could not have failed to do, had there 
been any; nor do we find, that ignorance 
in midwives proved destructive to the 
Hebrews, for they multiplied very fast. 
And if God gave laws and directions for 
the preservation of his rational creatures, 
in the most minute matter, which concern-
ed their temporal, as well as spiritual 
happiness; can we suppose him wholly in-
attentive to this grand object? Forbid it 
gratitude and common sense, and particu-
larly forbid it religion! I cannot help 
thinking, that so general an use of men, 
in the business of a midwife, has introduced 
a far greater number of evils among soci-
ety, than it has prevented: perhaps one 
woman in some hundreds may be found, 
who from disease, mal-conformation of the 
pelvis, or some lusus naturæ in the fœtus, 
requires the aid of an obstetric surgeon: 
but is that a good reason, why such num-
bers of the sex should throw off every 
female restraint, and give up to one or 
more men, that privilege which inviola-
|P_11
bly belongs to their husbands; and which 
many men give up with a very painful 
reluctance, for fear of being deemed nar-
row minded, or deficient in affection, 
though it is a proof that their affection is 
ardent. 

As some may dispute the truth of what I 
have now advanced, concerning the prac-
tice of midwifery being confined to women 
for near six thousand years, I will here 
give some quotations from the Encyclopœ-
dia. It says, The art of midwifery is 
certainly almost co-eval with mankind. 
The first midwife, of whom mention is 
made under that name, assisted at the 
second labour of Rachel, the wife of 
Jacob; another midwife is spoken of in 
Genesis, at the lying-in of Thamar, who 
was delivered of twins. But the most 
honourable mention of midwives, is 
that in Exodus, when Pharoah, King of 
Egypt, who had a mind to destroy the 
Hebrews, commanded the midwives 
to kill all the male children of the 
Hebrew women; which command they 
|P_12
disobeyed, and thereby obtained a re-
compence from God. 

From all the passages in scripture, 
where midwives are mentioned, it is 
plain, that women were the only practi-
tioners of this art among the Hebrews; 
among the Greeks also, women assisted 
at labours. Phanerte, the mother of 
Socrates was a midwife: Plato speaks at 
large of midwives, explains their func-
tions, regulates their duties, and remarks, 
that they had at Athens, a right of pro-
posing, or making marriages. [/1./]Hippo-
crates makes mention of them, as well 
as Aristotle, Galen, and Actius; this last 
frequently quotes a woman called Aspa-
sia, who was probably some great midwife. 
They were called among the Greeks, 
what we term mama, or grand mama: 
we are still better acquainted with the 
customs of the Romans, and know that 
they employed women only. Women 
|P_13
were also employed after the fall of the 
empire; and it is certain, that till lately, 
all civilized nations have employed 
women only as midwives. This appears, 
from their names in different languages, 
which are all feminine.—There were 
however, especially in great cities, sur-
geons who applied themselves to the art 
of midwifery, and made it their peculiar 
study; they were sent for in difficult 
cases, where the midwives found their 
incapacity; and then the surgeon endea-
voured to deliver the woman, by having 
recourse to instruments, useful in these 
cases, as by crotchets, crow-bills, &c. 
but as these cases happened but seldom, 
women remained in the possession of this 
business.—It is certain, according to 
Astruc, that Maria Theresa, wife of Louis 
XIV. employed women only in her la-
bours; and the example of the queen 
determined the conduct of the princesses, 
and court ladies, and likewise the ladies 
of the city. 

The same author tells us, that he had 
been assured, that the epoch of the em-
|P_14
ployment of men-midwives goes no 
farther back, than the first lying-in of 
Madame De La Valiere, in 1663. As 
she desired it might be kept a profound 
secret, she sent for Julian Clement, a 
surgeon of reputation; he was conducted 
with the greatest secrecy into her house, 
where the lady was, with her face co-
vered with a hood, and where it was 
said, the king was concealed in the cur-
tains of the bed:[/2./] the same surgeon was 
employed in the subsequent labours of 
the same lady, and as he was very suc-
cessful with her, men-midwives after-
wards came into repute, and the prin-
cesses made use of surgeons on similar 
occasions; and as soon as this became 
fashionable, the name of accoucheur was 
invented, to signify this class of surge-
ons. Foreign Countries soon adopted 
the custom, and likewise the name of 
accoucheurs, though they had no such 
|P_15
term in their own language: in Britain 
they are called men-midwives. 

Those ladies who are so proud of em-
ploying men-midwives in order to be fash-
ionable, may observe, that the mistress of 
Louis was the leader of it; and may also 
judge, how far their imitating her conduct 
in any respect is to their honour. 

How inconsistent is the conduct of those 
ladies, who subscribe so liberally to the 
lying-in hospitals, and the charity for deli-
vering women in their own habitations, and 
yet will not suffer a female midwife to come 
near their own persons, for fear of endan-
gering their lives! would it be charity to 
put poor women under the care of mid-
wives, if their lives were not safe in their 
hands? but these ladies have been induced 
to dispense with that delicacy, which was 
their greatest ornament, by the insinuations 
of defining men, who taught them to be-
lieve, they endangered their own lives, and 
that of their children, by employing women; 
how far this is truth, let the obstetric 
surgeon ask his own heart, and whether the 
well intrusted midwife needs his aid more 
|P_16
than once in several hundred labours. Let 
us now enquire, how far the unnecessary 
employment of men in midwifery, is com-
patible with that command of God, which 
requires chastity in heart, speech, and be-
haviour. I trust, charity will assist me to 
hope, that nothing criminal, in word or 
deed, takes place, at the time of this fa-
miliar intercourse of the sexes; but who can 
guard the heart, when such a strong sti-
mulus to impure thoughts presents itself? 
It has often surprised me, that men of real 
piety have not set their faces against it; 
they are not strangers to the corruptions 
of the human heart, and, as men, must be 
acquainted with the propensities of nature. 
It is argued, that pain prevents impure 
thoughts on these occasions; it may, in 
the woman, while the pain continues: but 
am I, who have been the mother of nine 
children, to be told, that there are several 
hours of ease, and even chearfulness, be-
stowed on many women in the time called 
labour? 

Whence is it, that some women speak 
with rapture of the men who deliver them 
|P_17
of their children, and take so much pains 
to forward their interest? the reason is 
obvious, it arises from a principle in nature, 
which requires no very great penetration 
to discover, and which nothing but innate 
modesty and chastity, or true piety can 
conquer; and where that prevails, we do 
not find men-midwives employed, except in 
cases of extreme danger, when every other 
feeling must give way to the love of life, 
and personal safety; and where the desires 
of the most sensual man on earth, must be 
absorbed, in the sympathy due to a woman 
in such distressing circumstances. 

It has been alledged, that woman's un-
derstanding does not admit of receiving 
such knowledge as is necesssary in the prac-
tice of midwifery; but women's understand-
ing is not so limited as some would represent. 
I only wish, that those who teach midwifery, 
would give them as clear a knowledge of 
that science, as they are capable of receiv-
ing: for my own part, I trust I am not in-
fluenced by sinister views, in what I am 
now going to advance; I have been above 
thirty years in the practice of midwifery, 
|P_18
my instructions were regular, and received 
from a gentleman, who had been a pupil of 
Dr. Smellie, (in his day, the father of mid-
wifery, in London.) He well knew, it 
was of the utmost consequence to me, to 
be well acquainted with the treatment of 
every case in midwifery, though some of 
them might never come under my conside-
ration. For that reason, he taught me the 
principles upon which nature acted, and 
the mechanical powers, by which she must 
be assisted, when deficient; and I can say 
with truth, that I never met with more 
than eight labours, which required the aid 
of an obstetric surgeon: and yet my know-
ledge or skill is not greater than every 
woman, having the advantage of a good 
education, and regular instruction in the 
art of midwifery, may attain to; provided 
they pay proper attention, and store their 
minds with what may be gathered from 
strict observations, upon every occurrence 
they meet with in the course of their prac-
tice. If women of good education and 
respectable connection, who through unseen 
misfortunes, have fallen into indigent cir-
|P_19
cumstances, would turn their attention to 
this science, and compel those who teach 
them, to do them justice, by submitting 
their theory to a public examination, like 
the surgeons' mates in the army and navy, 
when they had finished their studies; such 
women would become a blessing to so-
ciety, instead of being a dead weight 
upon their friends, and obliged to apply 
for charity in every corner, in which they 
could hope to find it. It may be objected, 
that there is no encouragement for women, 
because there are so many men in the pro-
fession; this objection is not well founded, 
for there always have been, and always 
will be, modest women in the world, who 
will employ female midwives, and will 
not suffer their persons to be polluted by 
the touch of a lascivious boy of twenty-
one. Midwives possessed of the advanta-
ges I mean, would have it in their power 
to do a great deal of good to themselves 
and others; to themselves, by becoming in-
dependent; to others, by many acts of 
kindness, which need not be mentioned here. 

Nothing can be more cruel, unjust, and 
|P_20
ungenerous, than the aspersions thrown by 
some men-midwives, on the character and 
conduct of the women in that profession; 
they no doubt look upon them with a jea-
lous eye, because they, in a great measure, 
interfere with their interest; but these men 
ought to consider, that women must live as 
well as themselves. It is very certain, that 
the men who teach them midwifery, take 
much larger sums of them, than they do of 
young men; and yet, to their great and 
unpardonable shame, they with-hold from 
them, too great a share of the knowledge 
they ought to communicate, and then give 
out to the world they are ignorant, and not 
safe to be trusted: is this consistent with 
justice, or humanity? It is a great blessing, 
that women have access to the writings 
of both antient and modern practitioners; 
and though I would not advise women to 
follow any of them in all their steps, I 
think an acquaintance with their practice 
very necessary; and when we know the 
path they trod, we cannot be ignorant how 
to act in the hour of need, if we diligently 
|P_21
compare their different opinions with our 
own experience. 

There is one very great evil, which 
midwives have to combat. When any of 
their patients are attacked with a dangerous 
complaint in child-bed, instead of consult-
ing a physician, a man-midwife forsooth 
is called in; a man whose interest it is, to 
condemn every midwife, and who, though 
he cannot speak in direct terms, seldom 
fails, by some oblique insinuation, to im-
press the mind of the friends, that there has 
been some misconduct on the part of the 
midwife. 

But why, in the name of common sense, 
are not physicians consulted on these occa-
sions? can they, who have made the nature 
of diseases, and the effects of medicines 
their particular study all their lives, be 
strangers to the diseases incident to child-bed 
women, and the proper treatment of them? 
or should the recovery of women, labour-
ing under dangerous complaints, be in-
trusted, till past redemption, in the hands 
of a man who has nothing to recommend 
him, except his having studied pharmacy, 
|P_22
and delivered some women of their chil-
dren? but this must be the man, and should 
the midwife object to him, she is suspected 
of being afraid of detection in her own 
conduct, and has the mortification to see 
her patient slip into the grave, through the 
fingers of ignorance, without the priviledge 
of finding fault; when these complaints 
occur among the patients of the man-mid-
wife, he does not call in another of his 
own profession, but a physician, to assist 
his judgement, and recover his patient, and 
the success proves the propriety of the 
conduct. 

When midwives are sent for to women 
who have a great degree of fever, an un-
usual hemorrhage, or any symptoms of 
abortion, produced, as is often the case, 
through bodily fatigue, mental passion, &c. 
they should recommend the advice of a 
physician, in preference to any other; for 
that woman cannot be mismanaged, who 
is under the direction of a good experienced 
physician, whatever her case be. 

|P_
[^A long horizontal double line.^]
[}SECTION I. }]
[}Anatomy of the Parts concerned in Midwifery. }]
THE principal part of midwifery, con-
sists in the art of delivering women 
safely of their children, and preserving the 
children from injury, when coming into 
the world. 

In order to this, it is necessary to have a 
perfect knowledge of the conformation of 
the human body, as far as concerned in 
the business of child-birth. 

And first, of the pelvis, which is a ring 
of bones, that supports the upper part of 
the body, and unites it to the lower parts; 
namely, the thighs, legs, and feet. Through 
this ring of bones, every child which comes 
into the world must pass, except they come 
by the Cæsarean operation; and the diffi-
culty of its coming is rendered greater or 
less, according to the size or dimensions of 
that ring. It is composed of several bones, 
|P_24
which are joined by cartilages, and which 
appear very distinct in infants; but in 
adults, these distinctions vanish, for the 
cartilages become ossified, so that it appears 
as one continued ring, more of the oval 
than circular shape. The long diameter at 
top, being from side to side; and at the 
bottom, from back to front. 

I shall, as is customary, describe its dif-
ferent bones. 
1st. The os sacrum – 
2d. The os coccygis, or 
coccix – – 
3d. Ossa ilia – – 
4th. The Ossa ischia — 
5th. Ossa pubis — — 
The foramina magna — 
Acetabula — — 
The sacro iliac — — 
Tuberosities of the ischia 
Spinous process of the ischia

Symphisis pubis — — 
The lower part of the back. 
The rump bone. 
The haunch bones. 
The seat bones. 
The share bone. 
The holes in the share bones. 
The sockets for the thigh 
bones. 
Are the joints between the 
ilia and sacrum. 
The round extremities of 
the seat bones. 
The sharp points which 
turn round to the 
sacrum. 
The cartilage which joins 
the share bones. 

|P_25
A clear knowledge of these bones, ena-
bles the midwife to practice her art with 
more judgement and safety, than she would 
otherwise do. 

[}the pelvis contains,}]
The uterus or womb, to which belong 
the ovaria and fallopian tubes. The womb 
resembles a pear a little flattened, and it 
is about the size of a pear, in the unim-
pregnated state; those who have studied 
the nature of this vessel, say, that it does 
not stretch as the fœtus grows, but grows 
in substance with it, and is reduced nearly 
to its original size soon after delivery. 

When the uterus is impregnated, the 
embrio is surrounded by a large quantity 
of fluid, called the liquor amnii; which 
preserves it from injury by any external 
pressure, and from being compressed by the 
womb itself, in the early months of gesta-
tion; it also serves to lubricate the passage, 
during labour: as this water is contained 
in a double membrane, the inner one is 
called amnios, the other chorion. 

|P_26
The uterus is considered under three
divisions. Its mouth, called os uteri, os 
tincæ, or os internum; its neck, called cervix 
uteri; and its fundus, called fundus uteri, 
to which the placenta is generally attached. 
The mouth of the womb, in young women, 
is felt like the largest size of the nipple of 
the breast, more than any thing else I can 
describe; but when women have done 
childing, it acquires a form something like 
the mouth of a puppy; one side of it feels 
hard and thick, while the other feels thin 
and contracted. 

The vagina is the sheath leading up to 
the womb, of which the os externum and 
labia pudendi are the entrance. The peri-
tonæum is the bridge, between the anus or 
fundament and the os externum. The 
urethra, or meatus urinarius, is joined to 
the neck of the bladder. The rectum is 
the lower or great gut. The above-menti-
oned, are the parts most liable to injury, 
in child-birth, and require the most tender 
treatment that can possibly be given them. 
A more minute description of the parts of 
generation is not absolutely necessary from 
|P_27
me, as you will find them in the writings of 
anatomists. 

I shall now describe the child's head, 
which must pass through the pelvis: it 
consists of various small bones, joined to-
gether by ligaments, which leave them 
freedom to collapse in the birth, that it may 
the more easily pass into the world. 

Those of its bones, which so necessarily 
collapse, are the 
Os frontis, or forehead. 
The os occipitis, or hind-head. 
The ossa parietalia, or side bones. 

The sutures, which run between them, 
are 
The lambdoidal, which divides the os occi-
pitis from the ossa parietalia. 
The coronal, which divides the ossa parieta-
lia from the os frontis. 
The sagittal runs along the top of the head, 
from the occiput to the root of the 
nose. 

There are two fontanels or moulds; 
the anterior one, between the parietals and 
os frontis, is sometimes called the bregma; 
the posterior one, between the occiput and 
|P_28
parietals, is called the vertex: the former 
may be easily distinguished from the latter, 
through the scalp, by the touch, having 
the angles of four bones meeting in it, 
whereas the other has but three. 

The long diameter of the head, is from 
the forehead to the hind-head; and the 
short diameter is from side to side; and we 
see, by comparing the diameters of the head 
with those of the pelvis, that the head 
enters the pelvis with the forehead to one 
hip, and takes the half-turn in passing 
through the cavity, as it cannot be expelled 
in any other position than with the forehead 
to the sacrum, or to the pubes, unless it be 
very small indeed. 

|P_29
[}SECTION II. }]
[}Of the different Kinds of Labours. }]
THEY are usually divided into five
classes. 
1st.Natural, when the head presents, and 
the child is expelled by the pains, 
within twenty-four hours. 
2d.Lingering, or laborious, when the head 
presents fair, and yet the labour is not 
over in less than forty-eight hours. 
3d.Preter-natural, when any other part of 
the child presents. 
4th.Difficult, when, though the head pre-
sents, it cannot be expelled without 
great help. 
5th.Complex, when the labour is attended 
with convulsions, floodings, descent 
of the navel-string, twins, &c. 

It is of great consequence to know, at 
an early period of the labour, how the 
head presents, because the different positi-
ons require different treatment. 

|P_30
[}SECTION III. }]
[}Of Natural Labours. }]
I AM now to turn your attention to a 
woman at her full time, taken in a natu-
ral labour; we shall suppose it is her first 
child, and that as she is unacquainted with 
the business, she will send for her midwife 
as soon as she discovers any symptoms of 
labour. The examination by the touch, 
or what is called trying a pain, is to be 
made in as private a manner as possible: 
the patient should lie on the bed, on her 
left side, and she should be covered with 
the bed-cloaths. The way to touch is, by 
introducing one finger, dipt in pomatum, 
into the vagina, and passing it up till you 
find the os uteri; if her case is favourable, 
you will find it a little dilated, the head of 
the child pressing upon it; and, in the time 
of a pain, you will find the membranes 
which contain the waters, protruding like 
a small bladder through the dilatation. 

|P_31
The best reason for staying with her now, 
is to keep her quiet, and to take care 
that her friends may not, by a mistaken 
kindness, give her spirits, or strong drink, 
which would certainly heat her, and might 
produce a fever, which would not only 
retard her labour, but make a good reco-
very doubtful. If the membranes break 
before the pains come on, you need not 
expect the child to advance till the waters 
are discharged, and you may safely leave 
the business to nature for some time; after 
the waters, there comes from the uterus a 
slimy mucus, sometimes tinged with blood; 
and it is generally a presage of a favourable 
labour, for it proves the patient relaxed, 
and conduces to make the labour easy, by 
lubricating the passage: we do not find this 
mucus in every labour, and where it is 
wanting after the discharge of the waters, 
we term it a dry labour, and the want of it 
must be supplied by emollient applications. 
Sometimes the head of the child plugs up 
the water, so that but a small portion of it 
comes away when the membranes break; 
and when the child comes forth, the rest 
|P_32
comes in such a torrent, that the young 
practitioners might mistake it for a flooding; 
of this, I know an instance, where a young 
gentleman was put into such perturbation, by 
a circumstance of this kind, that he cut 
the umbilical cord so close to the child's 
belly, it was with great difficulty the nurse 
could get hold of it with her nails, to 
enable him to tie a ligature. 

The manner in which the head descends 
is known by the touch, and the fontanels 
and sagittal suture must be our guide; the 
vertex is the best presentation. As the 
uterus contracts, the pains grow strong, the 
crown of the head is pushed against the 
lower part of one ischium, and the fore-
head is at the upper part of the other, and 
is, by the pains, forced and turned into the 
hollow of the sacrum: the vertex then, 
being pushed out below the os pubis, 
dilates the os externum; and you will find 
the os frontis pushing out the perinæum 
and anus so violently, that if you do not 
support them during every pain, they will 
certainly be lacerated. It sometimes hap-
pens, that the forehead is a long time make-
|P_33
ing the half-turn into the sacrum, and until 
you are experienced, you will wonder 
why the head is not coming forth, as you 
find it so near you; which it cannot do, 
till it is turned into the inferior long dia-
meter of the pelvis: for you are ever to 
remember, that at the brim of the pelvis, 
the long diameter is from one ilium to 
the other; and at the bottom, from pubes 
to sacrum; because the os coccygis is 
pushed back, by the child's head, three 
quarters of an inch. The head now having 
got through the os externum, you should 
wait a little, for most commonly, the pain 
that brought it discontinues: besides, the 
uterus should not be allowed to contract 
too soon, by the hasty extracting of the 
child; and if another pain does not expel 
the body in a few minutes, you take hold 
of the head in the following manner; 
place your twp fore fingers round the occi-
put, your middle fingers under the jaw 
bones, and let your thumbs meet over the 
sagittal suture; then move from side to side 
till the body comes forth. 

|P_34
But should the shoulders prove too bulky, 
pass two of your fingers over the right shoul-
der, bring down the arm with a semi-circu-
lar turn, under the sternum or chest; and 
the other shoulder coming now more readily 
into the passage, the body will soon come 
forth. 

Another species of natural labour is, when 
the forehead, instead of turning towards 
the sacrum, turns towards the pubes, in 
passing from the brim into the cavity of the 
pelvis. This position of the head may be 
known, by feeling the anterior fontanel at 
the pubes, and the sagittal suture running 
backward to the sacrum; and as the fore-
head is broader than the occiput, it cannot 
so easily pass under the arch of the pubes, 
but will take more time and pains to expel 
it: but there is no occasion to alter this 
position, except the pains are found insuf-
ficient to expel it; you must therefore 
proceed as in the former case, supporting 
the perinæum with the palm of your hand, 
while the head is passing through the os 
externum. 

|P_35
There is no occasion to confine the pa-
tient to any particular posture, until the 
time comes in which she must be assisted; 
she may sit, lie, or walk, as inclination 
leads, unless she has a flooding; in that 
case she should lie in bed, and be kept very 
cool. When the child is born, lay it on 
its side, with the back to the mother; and 
when it has cried, tie the navel string with 
a ligature, composed of several folds of 
common thread, at the distance of three 
inches from the child’s belly; then tie 
another near a finger's length beyond that, 
and cut the cord between the two ligatures. 
You now apply yourself to the delivery of 
the placenta. In first labours, it generally 
comes off very soon, except in subjects 
not very young; where it is apt to adhere 
too strongly to the uterus, the adhesion is 
discovered by its not coming down in the 
vagina, during a given time, perhaps some 
hours, in which time tie a compress mode-
rately tight round the abdomen, and rub 
it to assist the contraction of the uterus. 

If you can, by the touch, feel the root 
of the funis in the vagina, it is coming; 
|P_36
but if it still continues high out of your 
reach, you must not pull the cord too hard, 
for fear of causing an inversion of the 
uterus, that is, a turning of it inside out: 
but you must anoint your right hand with 
pomatum, oil, or lard, and passing it slowly 
into the uterus, you must search for the 
thin edge of the placenta, and insinuate 
your fingers with the utmost caution be-
tweenthat and the uterus, and pull it away 
by degrees, till it is all disengaged: then 
grasp it between your fingers, contracted in 
form of a cone, and draw it into the os 
internum; then withdraw your hand to 
give the patient a little rest, provided there 
is no great flooding; if there is, take it 
away as soon as possible, for the flooding 
will not cease till it is taken away. Some 
men of great reputation have left the ad-
hered placenta to the efforts of nature, but 
you are not thereby justified in leaving 
your patient, till it is extracted. 

|P_37
[}SECTION IV. }]
[}Of Lingering Labours. }]
WHEN the os uteri, and os externum dilate 
with great difficulty, by reason of rigi-
dity, owing perhaps to the patient not being 
very young; if the pelvis is well formed, the 
head of the child will descend in a greater 
proportion than the os uteri will dilate, 
consequently drags the uterus along with it 
too far into the pelvis; which, if not pre-
vented, would so stretch the ligaments of 
the womb, as to subject the woman to a 
prolapsus uteri, or descent of womb. 

To prevent this evil, it has been recom-
mended by very respectable authority, to 
introduce the fingers in form of a cone, 
and with every pain to stretch the os exter-
num, and pass the whole hand into the 
vagina; then to introduce the fingers be-
tween the os internum, and the head of the 
child, to prevent the uterus from being 
pushed down before the head: but let such 
of my readers as have suffered the anguish 
|P_38
of child-birth, say, what it would be to 
have this practised upon themselves: would 
not the hand be too great an addition to the 
head, already, perhaps, too large to pass? 
would not the friction used to dilate the os 
externum with every pain, occasion a great 
inflammation in the parts? In this case, I 
have always found the following method to 
answer; I made my patient take her labour 
in a horizontal posture, upon a bed or 
sopha, with her loins a little a little elevated; and 
with three fingers, in form of a triangle, 
I supported the os uteri at every pain, till 
it was sufficiently dilated: and I can add 
with truth, I never delivered a woman 
that had a prolapsus uteri. 

When there is an obliquity of the womb, we 
find the os tincæ turned up towards the 
pubes, or sacrum, but most commonly to-
wards the sacrum; this is a great hinderance 
to the labour, and should be rectified in 
time: that is done, by drawing the lower 
edge of it gently down into a proper direction 
with every pain, till it come to be felt 
round like a sort of ring. 

Sometimes the head is detained in the birth, 
by the umbilical cord being naturally too short, or 
|P_39
twisted round the neck or body of the child; and 
though it bear down in the time of a pain, 
it recedes when the pain is over, and keeps 
fluctuating up and down for a considerable 
time. If in this case, you put the patient 
in an erect posture, either on her knees or 
legs, the head, held down by its own gra-
vity, from one pain to another, is safely 
brought forth; great care must be taken to 
guard against cold in these cases. It is 
but very rare that the twisting of the navel 
string round the child, prevents its partial
expulsion, and when the head comes forth, 
if the body cannot follow, it is best to slip 
your finger between the neck and the cord, 
tie a ligature, and cut it; for in trying to 
slip it over the head, part of the placenta 
may be violently separated, and a flooding 
ensue. 

The next case to be considered, is a 
labour, where the bulk of the head bears too 
great a proportion to the pelvis. This is a case 
which rouses all the feelings of humanity, 
as a great deal of suffering may be expected. 
You find the abdomen very large, hard, 
and prominent; the os uteri very thick 
|P_40
and close; and the head above the brim of 
the pelvis, may be felt through the cervix 
uteri. If the waters be not already dis-
charged, when the os uteri begins to dilate, 
they will protrude like a small gut through 
it. If the patient be in a full habit, it 
will be proper to bleed her, and give a 
dose of castor oil to clear the bowels; if 
the pains have very short intermission, 
which is often the case in such labours, give 
her an opiate draught to mitigate them, and 
keep her cool and quiet. Suffer no con-
versation to take place, which has a tendency 
to lower her spirits, but let them be sup-
ported by every comfortable hope of a safe 
deliverance; give nothing strong or heating 
for nourishment, but let her have beef tea, 
or chicken broth. If she does not make 
water, apply the catheter, and give a clyster. 
It will be to little purpose to attempt stretch-
ing the parts, for the difficulty is in the 
bones. Do not fatigue the patient with 
frequent touching, but if she thinks the 
application of your hand affords her any 
ease, which is often the case, you should 
only, with one finger dipt in pomatum, 
|P_41
lubricate the vagina, just to amuse her. 
When the head begins to descend, the 
action of the uterus will encrease, and 
though the pains are not so frequent, they 
are stronger than at the beginning. 

What you have now strictly to attend to, 
is, whether the head is really advancing, 
or is puffing and swelling, and by that 
means deceives you; this you may know, 
by examining as high as you can round the 
head: if you find the bones of the cranium 
be coming nearer to you, although but 
slowly, you may look for a safe termination 
of the labour, provided you do not hurry 
your patient, but wait patiently for the 
expulsion of the child, by the efforts of 
nature. If on the other hand, after waiting 
many hours good pains, the swelling still 
encreases, though the bones of the head 
do not advance, you may expect the case 
to be very difficult; and the strength of 
the patient must determine when the 
crotchet, or the forceps should be applied. 
Some do not apply the forceps to a head 
that cannot pass the brim of the pelvis, 
but reduce it, and deliver with the blunt 
|P_42
hook and crotchet, judging it more safe for 
the mother. 

In all cases where you find by the size 
of the patient, the deformity or smallness of 
the pelvis, and the very slow descent of the 
head, that the labour will prove difficult, 
never object to the friends sending for a 
doctor, if they propose it; for should the 
pains decline or subside, which they often 
will do in first labours, and in many instan-
ces return again in a given time, yet this 
time will not be waited for: the doctor is 
sent for, and when come, regrets much 
that he was not called before the pains lost 
their force; although if he were a skilful 
and conscientious man, and had the labour 
under his own care from the beginning, he 
never would use instruments, while he had 
any benefit to expect from the efforts of 
nature, and the strength of the patient 
admitted of delay. 

When the head presents, and after advance-
ing a certain length into the pelvis, stops, the 
pains being strong and frequent, you may be 
sure there is some great obstacle in the way, 
either from its presenting in a wrong direc-
|P_43
tion, its being too much ossified, a great 
defect in the pelvis, or a tumor in the soft 
parts of the mother. Any of these circum-
stances may cause the head to be fast locked, 
in which case a man must be sent for to 
deliver with the forceps: you have been 
taught the use of them, but you may not 
be permitted to use them, nor would it be 
prudent in you to urge it, or object to the 
calling in a doctor; for although when he 
comes, the case may be exactly the same, 
yet should any misfortune happen, which 
perhaps is unavoidable, people are more 
readily reconciled to the event, because 
there is no appeal from what a doctor does, 
being granted he did all that could be done 
on the occasion. 

|P_44
[}SECTION V. }]
[}Of Preter-natural Labours, and first, of the 
Presentation of the Breech. }]
VARIOUS are the rules prescribed for 
the management thereof; some will 
have us to allow the child to descend in the 
manner it offers, while others advise to 
push up the body to get at the legs, or one 
leg, and deliver by the feet. This might 
be well, if the membranes continued whole 
till they had dilated the os uteri, so as to 
give the hand room to pass and get at the 
feet, but this is not always the case; there-
fore I prefer letting the child descend as it 
presents, with the legs turned up, till you 
can hook a finger into each groin, and move 
it from side to side, in order to assist the 
pains in bringing down the body: and 
when the breech is coming through the os 
externum, you must be very careful to 
support the perinæum, and prevent the 
laceration of that part. 

|P_45
When the body is brought forth as far as 
the navel, if the child's belly is not already 
towards the sacrum, you must turn it with 
a turn and quarter turn, which quarter turn 
you revert back again, being made only 
in order to be certain that the chin is clear of 
the pubes. The body being brought down, 
it remains that without loss of time, you 
bring down the arms and head; if the child 
is very small, and the woman well formed, 
they will soon follow the body: and if they 
do not, as the child cannot be safe any 
length of time in that situation, you must 
pass the fingers of your right hand over 
the child's right shoulder, bring down the 
arm with a half round turn under the 
sternum or chest, and apply your left hand 
to the other arm in like manner; then 
rest the child on your left hand and arm, 
with your fingers supporting the collar 
bones, and push the head cautiously, with 
your fingers, towards the sacrum; then 
raise the body towards the pubes, and it 
will come forth. Should you meet with 
any great resistance, get two fingers of 
your left hand into the mouth, to draw 
|P_46
the chin gently towards the breast; and 
apply the fingers of your left hand to the 
occiput, to move it a little from the pubes, 
and you will soon surmount the difficulty. 

The worst situation in a breech case, is, 
when the child's back lies to the sacrum, 
and cannot take the proper direction to 
the pubes; for it is far more difficult for the 
head to come down, the forehead being not 
so well suited to the arch of the pubes, as 
the occiput: added to this, the navel 
string is very apt to fall down between the 
child's thighs, which endangers its life; 
for if the cord cannot be returned, and 
prevented from being squeezed between 
the child's limbs, or between the head, and 
the bones of the pelvis, the child must die, 
because the circulation of the blood is 
stopt in the cord, before the child has 
drawn breath. 

If in a breech, or a footling case, the 
navel string should be found passing be-
tween the child's thighs, up the back, so 
that the child is, as it were, riding 
upon it, the cord must be cut, and the 
child delivered immediately, otherwise it 
|P_47
will die; and if you go to deliver without 
cutting it; you run the risque of separating 
the placenta violently, and bringing on a 
flooding. 

It has ever been found a very difficult 
matter to return and keep up the navel 
string, when once come down; some have 
recommended to roll it up in a piece of 
fine linen, and return it above the pubes, 
but the child's only safety lies in expediting 
the delivery; and as this depends so much 
upon the assistance you have from the pains 
and the mother's efforts, you cannot say 
how such a labour will terminate, till it is 
over. The knees are known from the 
shoulders, head, or breech, by taking up 
less room in the cavity of the pelvis. In 
all preter-natural cases, you cannot say with 
absolute certainty how the labour will ter-
minate; I would therefore advise you to 
acquaint the patient's friends, that there is 
some risque to the child, and to put it in 
their option whether you or any other 
person shall perform the delivery, and that 
for reasons already assigned; for though 
you cannot be at a loss how to deliver ac-
|P_48
cording to approved theory, yet should 
matters not go well in all respects, there 
will be a dissatisfaction, if you do not 
inform them before hand. 

When the knees, or feet present, the labour 
is treated the same as the breech; what 
clearly discovers the breech presentation, 
is the discharge of the meconium, when 
the membranes break, which they do very 
early in those labours. Sometimes children 
are born without any apparent signs of life, 
except the pulsation in the umbilical cord; 
especially in preter-natural births, where in 
many are still-born. Some try to recover 
the child before they cut the cord, others 
cut it before they tie it, in order to let it 
bleed a little; either may, or may not, 
succeed, according to the circumstances 
which went before; but whatever may be 
the cause of the child's perilous situation, the 
mode of recovering it is much the same; 
first press gently upon the ribs, with both 
your hands in an opposite direction, in order 
to remove any pressure that may be upon 
the heart; next blow air into the mouth, 
in order to expand the lungs; rub it with 
|P_49
spirits, shake it, chafe it with warm flannel, 
give it a clyster, and put it in a warm bath, 
if the weather is cold: these are the only 
things I know to be of use for its recovery. 
Be not too hasty in giving up your efforts, 
for there is now living in India, a gentle-
man, who, by the goodness of God, and 
my efforts was restored to life, after a 
doctor of extensive practice had given him 
up for dead: it was quite a transverse case; 
the short ribs presented, and I, being fear-
ful of the success, sent for the doctor, 
but the lady insisting upon my performing 
the delivery, and the membranes having 
broke, put me under the necessity of turn-
ing the child, and delivering by the feet, 
before his arrival. 

I shall next describe an arm case: in all 
cases where the child is to be turned, the 
presenting part is first, if possible, to be 
removed out of your way, in order to 
make room for passing the hand into the 
uterus, to get at the feet. When the os 
uteri is dilated sufficiently to give you an 
opportunity of discovering the arm, if any 
part of it is come down into the pelvis, 
|P_50
you must endeavour carefully to return it 
when the membranes break; and getting 
your fingers into the arm-pit, raise the 
head and shoulders towards the fundus 
uteri: this must be done by slow degrees 
in the absence of the pains, and cannot be 
done till you have dilated the os externum, 
and internum, so as to be able to pass the 
hand through both; then search for the 
feet, and deliver as when the knees, or 
lower extremities present. 

We have on record, instances when 
children, presenting the arm, have, by the 
efforts of nature, turned upon their own 
axis, and came to the world breech fore-
most: I should be apt to discredit this 
assertion , had I not, in the early part of 
my practice, met with a case, which con-
firms me in the belief of it; this was a case 
where the sternum presented, but I could 
not discover the situation of the child, till 
the membranes broke, when I felt the car-
tilage ensiformis, and the end of the short 
ribs very plain, above the brim of the 
pelvis. As I had then but little practice, 
I did not like to attempt the delivery, so I 
|P_51
sent for my preceptor in midwifery, but he 
was out of town attending a lady; I then 
sent to two gentlemen in the neighbour-
hood, who had been a long time in practice, 
but who, finding my patient was a poor 
woman, that could not make a proper re-
compence for their trouble, both flatly 
refused to come: in the mean time, the 
pains being very strong, the knees and legs 
were thrown down upon me, and my con-
sternation was so great, I hardly knew how 
they came, but I soon delivered the body 
and head. The child was dead, and very 
large, and there is no doubt of its having 
turned on its own axis. 

Notwithstanding these instances, I would 
never advise you to leave such cases to the 
efforts of nature, but as I have already 
observed, to endeavour, in an early period 
of the labour, at least as soon as you can 
pass the hand with safety, to turn and deli-
ver by the feet; and as, in turning the child 
in the womb, there is great danger of rup-
turing that viscus, by reason of the power-
ful contraction of it; so when your hand 
is in it, or passing into it, you should never 
|P_52
move it in time of a pain, for fear of 
causing the above misfortune. 

Although you have been shown how the 
hand is to be passed, you cannot be a judge 
of the difficulty that attends turning a child 
in utero, till you have tried it on the 
living subject; and it will be fortunate if, 
in the first essay, the waters are not all dis-
charged before you make the attempt, as 
the womb, being distended by them, gives 
you a far better opportunity of shifting the 
child into the position to which you wish to 
bring it. 

With respect to the place, where you 
introduce your hand, that must be regulated 
by the presenting part, and the direction 
in which the feet lie; the method that 
leads most easily to them must be pursued. 

Great care must be taken that you do 
not mistake a hand for a foot, like a gen-
tleman at Westminster, many years ago, 
who pulled at one of each, till the woman 
perished under his hands; this I think you 
cannot do, if you attend to the mark of 
both: as before observed, the length of 
the fingers, and shortness of the thumb, 
|P_53
mark the hand; the rounding of the heel, 
and shortness of the toes, mark the foot: 
I never made a mistake in this matter my-
self, and I trust you will not. Young 
practitioners are often alarmed, if they find 
the fingers or hand presenting, but this 
does not always indicate an arm case; it 
often accompanies the head or breech, and 
must be kept up till either is engaged in the 
pelvis. 

When the face presents, it is the advice of 
some, to push up the head, introduce the 
hand, and bring the vertex to present; but 
I know by experience, that many children 
are safely brought forth in that direction; 
so in a well formed pelvis, when the woman 
has born children, I never alter the position 
of the head. 'Tis true, in this case, the face 
is very much swelled, and of a livid 
colour, which goes off in a few days; but 
should it be found necessary to alter the 
position of the head, it must be done 
before it advances too far, otherwise the 
force that is requisite to push it up, if ap-
plied to, or near the eyes, may prove very 
hurtful to the child. If the head is fast 
|P_54
wedged in this position, delivery with the 
forceps is the best remedy I know of. 

Laborious births occur more frequently 
than preter-natural ones, and require far 
greater skill and experience to manage them 
properly. When the child presents wrong, 
there are but few rules for setting it right, 
and the general method is turning, and de-
livering by the feet; but when, from the 
great size of the head, or its disproportion 
to the capacity of the pelvis, the child 
is detained too long, it requires great 
experience to determine, how much a 
woman and child can bear without danger 
to either: nothing can be a greater proof 
of this, than the forwardness with which 
young men, in the practice of midwifery, 
use instruments in laborious cases; of this 
I saw a striking instance very lately among 
my own patients. As the case was only of 
the lingering kind, and was treated like a 
difficult one, I will relate it by way of in-
troduction to that species of labours. 

A robust woman about thirty-five years 
of age was taken in labour at four o'clock 
in the afternoon, and as the pains were but 
|P_55
slow, I was not sent for till the evening; 
when I found every thing in as fair a way 
as I could expect with a woman of her age 
and constitution; the os uteri a little dilated, 
the head presenting fair, and the water 
beginning to protrude: the parts were 
rigid, but her strength was great, and the 
capacity of the pelvis, which was by no 
means too confined, gave me every reason 
to look for a favourable issue; I gave an 
injection, and likewise a spoonful of castor 
oil, to clear her upper as well as lower 
passages. I stayed with her all night, to 
prevent her taking any strong drink, by 
the persuasion of the few ignorant women 
I found with her; the membranes broke at 
seven in the morning, and the labour was 
going on as such cases generally do, after 
the discharge of the water: there was no 
mucus discharged from the uterus to lubri-
cate the parts, but this defect I supplied 
occasionally by a little pomatum. I was 
under no apprehension about my patient, 
any farther than that she would have a hard
labour, as I at the beginning expected. 
She had an old maiden sister with her, who 
|P_56
about twelve o'clock of the day seemed 
very unhappy that she was not delivered, 
and about two o'clock the husband came 
into the room, and told me he had reason 
to think his wife would need a doctor; I 
answered, that I saw no occasion for a 
doctor, but if he or his friends were uneasy, 
and wished for one, I would not urge the 
contrary. I asked my patient if she wished 
to have a doctor called, and she answered 
in the negative. 

About four o'clock the drowsy period of 
the labour came on, and the gossips ob-
served that the pains were not so brisk as 
they had been; I assured them she would 
do well, and that her pains would be better 
when she had had a little sleep, to which 
she seemed very much disposed; but they 
seemed so very impatient, that I left them 
to act as they thought proper. A gen-
tleman of experience in the neighbour-
hood was proposed, but rejected by the 
woman, and another was proposed with no 
better success; I told them of a young man 
in the neighbourhood, who was apothecary 
to some families I attended, and had man-
|P_57
midwife on his door, but that I could not 
answer for his experience. In a little 
time I was informed a doctor was come, and 
wanted to see me; he turned out to be the 
person I mentioned, and I told him the 
progress of the labour from its commence-
ment; that I knew there was not the least 
danger, that the occiput was passing under the 
arch of the pubes, the tumefaction on the 
vertex parted the labia pudendi the breadth 
of near 2 inches, the parietals were pressed 
upon the lower edges of the tuberosities of 
the ischia, the perinæum was stretching, 
and the waters, being plugged by the head, 
were now distilling in small quantities with 
every pain; and as I expected no more 
than a verdict from him, which I thought 
would satisfy the friends, I did not object 
to his seeing the woman. He accordingly 
came, and enquired into her situation, felt 
her pulse, told her she would do very well, 
for she had a good strong pulse, that could 
bear any thing, but he would leave her 
then, and return in about an hour's time. 
He was better than his promise, for he 
returned in half the time, furnished with 
|P_58
his tools; he took his seat, and whispered 
to me, who sat close by him, that he was 
going to apply the lever. I answered, if he 
took the labour in his own hands, he might 
act as he pleased. He introduced the in-
strument, but withdrew it again immediately, 
without making any effort to deliver; he 
then told the woman he would soon deliver 
her, with a pair of artificial hands, which 
they often made use of, and which were 
very safe. I was exceedingly terrified to 
see a perfect twig of the obstetric profession, 
whose time in practice could afford him but 
very few (if any) opportunities of deliver-
ing with instruments, attempt to use them 
on my patient, especially as I was confident 
there was not the smallest occasion for deli-
vering her by force, for a few hours more 
time would have done the business very 
safely: however, the poor woman was put 
in a posture to be delivered with the for-
ceps, which when applied, soon lost their 
hold; the second attempt had no better 
success; by a third effort, the head was 
brought forth, and the body soon followed, 
with a sanguinary hue all over, as it had 
|P_59
fallen into a butcher's tub in the slaughter-
house. It discovered no signs of life, 
except the pulsation in the navel-string, 
which soon subsided, and the doctor made 
various trials to recover it; he then gave 
it to me, to try what I could do, while 
he brought the placenta, and upon wiping 
its head and face, I discovered a deep 
wound upon the right temple, which ap-
peared to me to be evidently the cause 
of the child's death, because it was in the 
direction of the temple vein; but as the 
doctor was young, and of course his cha-
racter delicate, I endeavoured to veil this 
misfortune, by drawing the lips of the 
wound close together, and keeping my 
finger upon it, 'till the blood dried to pre-
vent it from opening. As the gossips were 
engaged about the woman, who was all this 
time flooding, I had abundant opportunity of 
managing this business, and of washing the 
poor infant, and laying it out; when I was 
thus employed, the doctor came to me, 
and whispered me to put a cap on it: he ran 
to the basket, and brought me one. I took 
the hint, and pinned it close over the face 
|P_60
to hide the cut; and I now declare before 
God, that I could not have been more 
careful to conceal this misfortune, if it had 
happened in my own hands. The doctor's 
sentiments of generosity were very different 
from mine, for when, on his first visit, the 
parents regretted very much the child's 
death; he said as to that, the child was 
dead four hours before he was called;
this was a gross falsehood, and I leave any 
practitioner to judge, whether a fair labour 
of twenty-four hours could prove fatal to 
a child: besides the pulsation in the navel-
string was a clear proof that it was not 
quite dead when born, otherwise to what 
purpose did he make any efforts to restore 
it to life, and request me to try what I 
could do for it. I firmly believe, he was 
not then conscious of the injury it had 
received by the instrument, for it was all 
over so covered with blood, that he could 
not see the cut while it was on his lap; 
nor could I, till I wiped its poor head and 
face with a cloth: however, this misrepre-
sentation of the case answered his purpose, 
for it transferred the whole blame from 
|P_61
him to me, and he became the minion of 
this little Plebian family, while I was insulted 
by them, and suspected of an evil in which 
I had no hand, but that of having suffered 
a young unexperienced man to avail himself 
of an opportunity, which then offered, of 
trying experiments on a midwife's patient; 
had he been silent upon the subject, or had 
he acknowledged, (as he afterwards did to 
me, when I reproved him for his conduct) 
that he thought the death of the child, and 
the appearance of it when brought forth, 
was owing to the separation of some portion 
of the placenta, that would have prevented 
any blame falling on me: because if such 
mischief existed at all, it must have happen-
ed in his own hands, for there was not the 
smallest appearance of flooding, till after 
the introduction of the forceps. I had a 
very good opportunity of knowing this, 
because I thought it my duty to guard 
against some part of the mischief, which 
was like to befal my patient, by support-
ing the perinæum during the operation, so 
that I perfectly know when the flooding 
took place; it would argue great ignorance 
|P_62
to say with him, that it began sooner, but 
the head had plugged up the discharge, 
because the water which was plugged up, 
was coming down in small quantities, and 
must have been coloured, if any part of 
the placenta had been separated. 

This narrative should caution midwives, 
against putting their patients and their re-
putation at the mercy of young unexperi-
enced men; for had this affair happened in 
the early part of my practice, it might 
have hurt me very essentially, as then, like 
most of the profession, I was employed in 
the lower walks of life: and as the ignorant 
are always very credulous, the charge of 
having been the occasion of a child's death, 
would in all probability have tript my 
heels. In a family of superior situation, a 
young practitioner would not be applied to 
in a difficult labour, but here he was chosen 
by the patient and her friends, in prefe-
rence to men of great experience, merely 
because it was taken for granted he would 
come for a smaller fee: this is a bad species 
of œconomy, for if men are to be employed 
in midwifery, it is only necessary when 
|P_63
difficulty occurs, and they should be men of 
known integrity and long practice; the 
idea that any man-midwife will do, is a 
mistaken notion indeed, and many have 
found it so to their cost. 

|P_64
[}SECTION VI. }]
[}Of Difficult Labours. }]
BEFORE we proceed to consider the 
treatment of difficult labours, it will be 
necessary to mention the true causes of 
them; and according to the writings of the 
best anatomist, the most frequent is, great 
disproportion between the child's head, and the 
mother's pelvis. 

The long diameters of the pelvis are said 
to be five inches, and the short diameters, 
four inches. The child's head is said to be 
three inches and a half from one parietal 
tuberosity to the other, and four inches and 
a half from the forehead to the hind head; 
so that if the head be much longer, it 
cannot pass through a common sized pelvis 
without great difficulty; if, added to this, 
the pelvis be very small, the difficulty will 
be still greater. When the rickets, molli-
ties ossium,[/3./] or weakness of any kind, 
|P_65
obliges the pelvis to take a distorted or 
confined form, or when women marry late 
in life, and the parts become rigid, and the 
articulation of the coccix with the sacrum 
becomes anchilosed, so that near three 
quarters of an inch are lost in the long 
diameter of the lower aperture of the pelvis, 
it must occasion difficult labours; and as 
the chief difficulty arises from the narrow-
ness of the pelvis, midwives when first 
employed by a patient, ought to examine 
the capacity of the pelvis, to know the 
distance from the pubes to sacrum: for this 
purpose, four fingers must be introduced 
into the vagina, till the fore finger touches 
the inside of the symphisis pubis; and if 
the distance from that to the nearest verte-
bra admits the remaining fingers in a direct 
line, it constitutes a common sized pelvis, 
provided the four fingers breadth measures 
something more than three inches and a 
half. 

With respect to the difficulties which 
arise from a stone in the bladder, tumours 
in the os uteri, straitness in the vagina, too 
great osssification of the head, swellings of 
|P_66
labia pundendi, &c. these cases should be 
put under the care of an experienced ob-
stetric surgeon. 

Those who are unacquainted with the 
nature of labours, and the diversity they 
admit of, think a woman's life must be lost, 
if she is not delivered in forty-eight hours, 
or very little more, from the commencement 
of the pains; and they seldom give longer 
time, before they express great anxiety, 
and a wish that the patient be delivered by 
whatever means it can be done, and we are 
not surprised that the poor sufferer should 
wish to be relieved at any adventure: thus 
the woman's impatience and the mistaken 
kindness of her friends thrust her into 
danger, from which a little more time would 
have saved herself and child. 

It is no uncommon thing, to see a woman 
with her first child three days and nights in 
labour, and delivered very safely by efforts 
of nature, and the common assistance given 
with the hand; and indeed it would arraign 
the goodness of Almighty God to suppose, 
that the powers of nature in the human 
species should be suspended so frequently, 
|P_67
when bringing forth their young, as would 
appear by the very great number of delive-
ries performed by instruments in this age; 
and yet we cannot, upon any other princi-
ple, assign a reason, why women should 
differ so much from the rest of the female 
creation, and require so often what they 
scarcely ever require: but blessed be God, 
women seldom required it, until man had 
found out many inventions. The instances 
in which instruments are required, are few, 
and very few indeed can occur in the prac-
tice of one individual; but as young men 
who practice midwifery, never think them-
selves sufficiently qualified, until they are 
expert in the use of instruments, we need 
not be surprised, to see them fly with avi-
dity to every shadow of pretence for using 
them, especially if called to a midwife's 
patient, where some of the wantonly usurp 
the province of nature, and run away with 
that gratitude which alone is due to the 
author of it. That delivery with instru-
ments has saved some lives, is undeniable, 
but I am fully convinced, that the instances 
in which they have done service, will never 
|P_68
compensate for the mischief done by their 
unnecessary and mal-application. 

Of all instruments ever invented to 
extract the child too long detained in the 
pelvis, the forceps are of the greatest 
utility; and although some authors declare, 
that much mischief has been done by them, 
when in the hands of unskilful men, yet 
there is none of all the instruments I ever 
saw, so well calculated to save the lives of 
children. 

The forceps are a pair of blades made of 
tempered steel; some of them have straight, 
and some have curved edges; they are 
generally covered with fine soft leather, and 
can be insinuated between the head of the 
child and the pelvis, in order to take hold 
of and extract it, when it is so firmly fixed, 
that the pains are not sufficient to bring it 
down: but we ought to be well assured 
that it is really fixed, before we do violence 
to nature, or terrify the patient, since they 
never must be used without acquainting her. 

In order to the successful application of 
the forceps, four things must be observed; 
first, the conformation of the pelvis; second, 
|P_69
the state of the parts of generation, and 
situation of the head; third, it's advance; 
and fourth, the strength of the patient: all 
these points ascertained, and the necessity 
of using them unequivocal, the patient is 
laid upon her back across the bed, with her 
head and shoulders a little elevated; her 
breech projecting a little over the side, and 
her knees separated and raised up towards 
her belly: the midwife after dipping the 
fingers of her right hand in pomatum or 
lard, searches till the ear can be felt; she 
then anoints the blades of the forceps, and 
insinuates her fingers between the head and 
the pelvis; then slides one blade of the for-
ceps slowly up between her fingers and the 
child's head, taking particular care that the 
extremity of the blades be always kept 
close to the head, for fear of taking hold of 
any part of the mother: this blade being 
advanced, till the place where it locks 
reaches the externum; the other blade 
must be introduced in the same careful man-
ner, opposite to the former, over the other 
ear. If the handles come not together, 
you may depend upon it they will not only 
|P_70
slip and lose their hold, but that they will 
compress the bones of the cranium consi-
derably, when you begin to extract, which 
ought to be in time of a pain. 

You should gently assist the head to turn 
as it turns in a natural labour, and the 
extracting force should at first be moderate, 
and encrease in proportion to the resistance 
you meet with. The handles must be slowly 
pressed back upon the perinæum, and the 
movement must be from handle to handle, 
and the efforts to deliver should be at regu-
lar intervals, like labour pains. 

When the head stops with the face nearer 
to the pubes than the sacrum, it should be 
drawn out with the face under the arch 
of the pubes; and when the head is coming 
forth, the handles should be raised up over 
the pubes, and the midwife should stand up 
to give her more power in the exercise of 
her arms: the left hand must support the 
perinæum, for fear of laceration in passing 
over the head. 

In whatever situation the head presents, 
the ears must be sought for and found, other-
|P_71
wise we act at random, and cannot answer 
for the consequence. 

The lower the head is descended before 
the forceps are applied, the more sure will 
be the success of using them. 

Notwithstanding the benefit which may 
be derived from the seasonable and skilful 
application of this instrument, I must ever 
lament, when I see the crotchet and vectis in 
the hands of young men, some of whom 
carry the vectis in their pockets when called 
to labours, just as regularly as the car-
penter carries his foot-rule when he goes to 
work

The vectis is like one blade of the straight 
edged forceps, only a little longer, and it 
is introduced in the same manner; some 
pass it under the pubes, and over the 
child's ear, till the extremity of the blade 
reaches the chin; then taking a firm hold 
of the handle, when the pain comes on, 
they raise it up towards the pubes, by 
which means the action of the blade, in 
conjunction with the pains, bears down the 
head: others prefer applying the lever to 
the occiput. 

|P_72
This instrument is very handy for those 
who are fond of doing more than their duty, 
by giving nature more assistance than she 
really needs, to the great detriment of 
mothers and children, and that merely to 
save their own time. When the curved edge 
forceps are applied, the convex edge of the 
blades must always come out towards the 
sacrum, because their convexity answers to 
the concavity of the sacrum. 

Those who are acquainted with the shape 
of the pelvis, will see the necessity of keep-
ing the handles of the forceps gently pressed 
upon the perinæum, in order to prevent 
the extremities of the blades from running 
against the sacrum, instead of ascending to 
the upper aperture of the pelvis, which 
is something like a bason tilted a little for-
ward. 

When the head is so large, or the pelvis 
so narrow, that the head cannot descend by 
the force of the pains, some have advised 
to push it up, turn the child, and deliver 
by the feet; but if the head has come 
down a certain length, this will be found 
impracticable; and if the lever, or the 
|P_73
forceps, will not do, the only alternative is 
to open the head, and deliver with the 
crotchet, as before observed. 

It is no wonder, that men of humanity 
should procrastinate this dreadful opera-
tion, until they have great reason to hope 
that the child is really dead. 

I have been an eye witness of two in-
stances, when this procrastination proved 
fatal to the mothers, in cases that admitted 
of their being saved; I am therefore very 
solicitous, that those mothers who are so 
unfortunate as to need such a sacrifice, may 
obtain the benefit of it before it is too late. 
The cases above-mentioned, were under 
the care of men of known abilities, and 
nothing but humanity or infatuation could 
have stood between them and their duty, 
who knew so perfectly what ought to be 
done, though it had not been urged by me, 
who was considered both as timid and im-
patient on these occasions; but the sequel 
proved that my fears were too well ground-
ed, for one woman did not live to go 
through the delivery, the head only being 
taken away; and the other died in less than 
|P_74
an hour after delivery, having been in 
labour from Monday morning till Friday 
night. Perhaps it may be necessary to 
observe, that the doctors were called at an 
early period of these labours; that is, 
within twelve hours of their commence-
ment. 

I then determined never to witness ano-
ther being lost in the same manner, and I 
have met since but with one case which 
required the head to be opened; it was 
done before the woman was too much 
exhausted, and she not only lived, but 
recovered much better than I expected. 
Having three times seen the operation of 
opening the head, and delivering with the 
crotchet, I am the better enabled to describe 
it. 

I must again remind you, that in most 
difficult labours, the patient is generally 
let blood, from six to ten ounces, accord-
ing to her strength and constitution. When 
the head is to be opened, the patient is laid 
on her side, or back, at the discretion of 
the operator, who must be furnished with 
a pair of scissars nine inches long, with 
|P_75
stops to prevent their advancing beyond a 
certain length; and when he has dilated 
the os externum, he, with his fingers, 
searches for one of the sutures of the head, 
against which he holds his fingers, whilst 
he passes the scissars slowly, till they reach 
the brain: when they have gone the proper 
length, he turns them round several times, 
opening the handles wide to enlarge the 
incision; the scissars are then withdrawn, 
and the broken splinters of the skull are 
covered with the scalp, or taken away, to 
prevent wounding of the mother: when the 
brain is evacuated, he takes hold of the 
remaining part of the skull with his fingers, 
or with the blunt hook, to draw it forth; 
one hand is in the vagina, and held fast 
against the outside of the skull, to help it 
forth, and also to receive the point of the 
instrument in case it slip, lest it should 
wound the mother. 

But if the head be so large in proportion 
to the pelvis, that the child cannot be 
brought forth by these helps, the operator 
endeavours to get firmer hold with the 
crotchet in the mouth, or under the chin, 
|P_76
or in some part of the base of the skull, 
encreasing the extracting force, in propor-
tion to the resistance, till it comes forth. 
Some have, after opening the head, left the 
patient for several hours, before they have 
delivered her, as in that time the child is 
supposed to turn more flabby and vapid, 
and of course is more easily drawn forth: 
others have flattened the head with the 
forceps, and extracted it before they have 
left the patient; these methods are varied 
according to the different opinion of the 
operators. 

As such operations cannot fall to the 
share of a midwife in this country, I need 
not be more minute in my account of them, 
but as I know a country, where they have 
been performed by midwives, I have en-
deavoured to get such a knowledge of them 
in theory, as would enable me to attempt 
them, were it my lot to be placed in a 
part of the world, where no other assistance 
could be found. Although the Cæsarean
operation has been performed by women, 
yet as I have never seen it performed, I 
shall not trouble the reader with any ac-
|P_77
counts of it; those who wish to know it, 
may consult Smellie or Baudelocque. It 
is to be hoped, no midwife in this country 
will attempt to use instruments of any kind, 
who has not well studied the anatomy of 
the parts concerned in parturition, as well 
as the nature of instrumental deliveries on 
a proper machine. 

|P_78
[}SECTION VII. }]
[}The Diseases of Pregnant Women, and the 
Symptoms of Pregnancy. }]
WHEN you have studied and professed 
midwifery, it is expected that you 
know the signs of pregnancy, and also 
some of the diseases to which pregnant 
women are subject. The first thing that 
affects them is nausea and vomiting; this begins 
with some of them a few days after concep-
tion; and with others, not till the time when 
the menses should return, and is most 
powerfully felt in the morning, just upon 
getting up; the vomiting is seldom dange-
rous, and often salutary, for we see women 
bring up a great quantity of bile and 
phlegm, which collects very fast upon the 
stomach in the time of utero gestation, 
because the digestion is weaker than at 
other times. 

It is not my intention to give you all 
the reasons assigned for the diseases which 
occur during pregnancy, because you will 
|P_79
find them in the writings of medical men; 
it is sufficient for my purpose to say they 
exist, and to inform you what is most likely 
to relieve them, as far as my province 
leads. In plethoric habits it is proper to 
bleed to the quantity of seven or eight 
ounces; the stomach should be sometimes 
cleared by an infusion of camomile flowers, 
or a cup of strong green tea, for this will 
not strain more than the natural sickness, 
and a cup of strong mint tea, taken the 
first thing in the morning, is often of service. 
The diet should be light, and taken in small 
quantities, especially suppers. In costive 
habits, the body should be kept open by 
gentle laxatives, such as lenitive electuary, 
castor oil, &c. 

Another complaint, which sometimes oc-
curs in the first months, is a frequent desire 
to make water, because the impregnated 
uterus as yet lies low in the pelvis, and 
presses upon the bladder, so that there is 
not much room to contain the water; and 
sometimes the pressure may be upon the 
sphincter of the bladder, and occasion a 
stranguary. In this case an attempt should 
|P_80
be made to raise up the uterus in the pelvis, 
which may relieve the neck of the bladder; 
if this fail, the catheter should be applied; 
the method of doing it has been shewn you: 
this, with fomentations, injections, and the 
warm bath, in case of real stranguary, is 
all that midwives should attempt to recom-
mend; the prescribing of medicines should 
be left to those who have made the nature 
of drugs their study. 

The piles are often very troublesome to 
pregnant women, and they are relieved by 
fomentations, poultices, and bleeding with 
leeches. In the later months, women in a 
relaxed habit are liable to a swelling of 
the leg, feet, and labia pudendi; this is said 
to be owing to an imperfect return of the 
lymph from the lower parts of the body, 
and it goes off in a few days after delivery, 
when the blood and other fluids have a free 
circulation. 

The cardialgia or heart-burn deserves a 
little notice here. Magnesia alba is often 
taken for it, in order to absorb the acid in 
the stomach, but I know of nothing that 
can quite remove it. 

|P_81
The signs of pregnancy are, suppression 
of the menses, loathing of different foods 
and drinks, and fancying others which are 
neither pleasant or salutary, heat-burn, vo-
miting, cough, shortness of breath, lowness 
of spirits, heat in the palms of the hand, 
and soles of the feet, costiveness, shooting 
pains in the breasts, and some pains in the 
back; yet many of these symptoms may 
exist when a woman is not with child: what 
is most to be relied on, is the suppression 
of the menses, increase of size, and a 
hardness in the hypogastrium; but when 
the case is doubtful, and some months 
have elapsed in a state of suspense, we 
must examine by the touch. If the womb 
be impregnated, you will find it larger and 
heavier, when you press against it, than it 
is in the unimpregnated state; the neck 
will be considerably shorter, and after 
what women call quickening, the fundus 
rises above the brim of the pelvis; at seven 
months, the head of the fœtus may be 
plainly felt through the cervix uteri. 

|P_82
[}SECTION VIII. }]
[}Of Abortion. }]
AS miscarriages often happen in the first 
four months of pregnancy, women can-
not be too careful of exposing themselves 
to any violent agitation of body and mind 
during that period; for nothing debilitates 
a woman's constitution sooner than frequent 
miscarriages; and although some make very 
light of them in the earlier months, yet 
they are, in the latter months, often dread-
ful in their consequences, by reason of 
great floodings. Some women, though few, 
menstruate in the first months of pregnancy, 
which renders their situation doubtful un-
til they quicken, and that generally hap-
pens later than in those who do not men-
struate. When women are attacked with 
floodings in the earlier months, some re-
commend bleeding, but the propriety of 
this depends upon the constitution of the 
patient. If the evil proceed from a ple-
|P_83
thora, bleeding is proper, and the antiphlo-
gistic diet is to be observed. The best 
method I have experienced, is to keep 
the patient in a horizontal posture, and her 
room cool and quiet, applying cloths dipt 
in vinegar, well wrung, to the loins, ab-
domen, and pundenda, changing them be-
fore they turned warm. In delicate habits 
I do not approve of bleeding; I have 
found it necessary to support such women 
with nourishing broths, beef tea, chocolate, 
and occasional draughts of cold claret and 
pump water, for nothing should be taken 
warm. Opiates are good; ten drops of 
laudanum in any common liquid. 

The astringent draughts, which are com-
posed of bark, elixir of vitriol, infusion of 
red roses, dragon's blood, &c. but these 
should be made by an apothecary. If the 
stomach can bear a few grains of alum 
powder, taken in any drink, it is a great 
astringent; where the stomach cannot bear 
it, it may be given in an injection. 

It would be endless to enumerate all the 
causes of abortion. Whatever brings too 
much blood to the uterus, and stimulates 
|P_84
the adjacent parts, may occasion it. Acute 
distempers, violent agitations of body or 
mind, in short, whatever tends to cause a 
separation of the placenta, may bring on 
miscarriage; and when the adhesion of the 
placenta to the uterus is too weak, a very 
trifling circumstance will occasion its sepa-
ration. The treatment must be suited to 
the causes of it, and what suits one consti-
tution will not do for another. When 
miscarriages are attended with labour pains, 
they should be left to nature; but when 
they are attended with great floodings, and 
without pain, nature should be assisted, by 
dilating the os uteri, and taking away the 
contents of the uterus. In such a case it 
will be proper to consult a physician, for 
you can do as much good as any accoucheur. 

|P_85
[}SECTION IX. }]
[}Complex Labours. }]
[}flooding. }]
AS flooding in the latter months is occa-
sioned by a separation of a part or 
the whole of the placenta, it proves the 
necessity of guarding against violent exer-
cise, and keeping very still, when it appears, 
because motion increases the evil. If the 
flooding can be restrained by the means I 
have prescribed in cases of abortion, so 
that the life of the patient is not in danger, 
we should not do any thing to force a la->
bour, but wait with patience, and keep up 
the woman’s spirits by every possible means: 
but, on the other hand, should the hemorr-
hage be such as to occasion fainting fits, 
the woman being in the last months of preg-
nancy, we should dilate the os uteri by 
degrees, at such intervals of time as is 
common between the natural pains; then 
pass the hand to break the membranes, 
|P_86
turn the child, and deliver by the feet. In 
flooding cases, the os uteri easily yields to 
the efforts made to dilate it. 

The most critical flooding case that ever 
occured where I have attended, was that 
of a lady, who was then at her country 
seat thirteen miles from town, and was 
seized with a flooding in the seventh month. 
I was sent for, but before my arrival, the 
gentleman who practised midwifery in the 
village had given her medicines, and the 
complaint did, in a great degree, subside 
before night, when I was obliged to return 
to town. As I was apprehensive she would 
not go to her full time, and knew she was 
very averse to the attendance of a man to 
deliver her, I advised her coming to town 
as soon as she could be removed with safety, 
for I could not answer that her labour 
would not be premature, and attended with 
the same circumstances, which would ren-
der it absolutely necessary for her to be 
delivered before I could probably come 
from London; in that case, I begged the 
doctor might be permitted to give every 
assistance in his power, as it certainly would 
|P_87
be carrying delicacy too far, to wait till I 
could come so many miles. But the season 
proving very inviting, she deferred coming 
to town, and went on very well till the end 
of the eighth month; when, about two 
o'clock in the morning, she waked with a 
violent flooding, and I was again sent for. 
On my arrival I met her husband in a 
state of distraction, who told me there was 
not the smallest hopes of his darling wife: 
without making any reply, I rushed up 
into the bed-chamber; the lady was appa-
rently dead. I examined by the touch, 
and found the placenta totally detached 
from the uterus, and presenting at the os 
uteri. I confess I was astonished that no 
attempt had been made to deliver her be-
fore I came, especially as the doctor was 
in the next room, and I am yet a stranger 
to the true cause of it. I told the doctor I 
did not think she had two hours to live, 
but I would endeavour to do all that could 
be done, by delivering her. She had not 
taken one labour pain at all, and it was in 
vain to look for any; so I dilated the os 
internum, searched for the thin edge of 
|P_88
the placenta, perforated the membranes, 
removed the thick part towards the right 
side, and found the head presenting. As 
she was so low she could neither look 
up or speak, I thought it more advisable 
to bring the child as it presented, than to 
run the risque of extinguishing the feeble 
share of remaining life, by the fatigue of 
turning and delivering by the feet. My 
endeavours were blessed with success; she 
was delivered in a very little time, and re-
covered amazingly, for she took a journey 
of more than a hundred miles in six weeks 
after. I have since attended her several 
times, and she is, thank God, still living, 
and can answer to the truth of what I here 
assert. 

In such cases we do not expect living 
children, unless the patient can be delivered 
immediately upon the separation of the pla-
centa, for the source of life is cut off, 
whenever a total separation of it takes place. 
In such violent floodings the extremities 
turn very cold, and it will be necessary 
to apply stone bottles, containing warm 
water to the feet, and put brandy, or 
|P_89
some other ardent spirits, in the patient's 
drink, in order to keep the blood in circu-
lation; but that is only when she is ex-
tremely low. It is a melancholy circum-
stance, when a flooding is so very violent, 
that nothing but speedy delivery can save 
the patient's life; but seeing there are such 
cases, you should inform the friends of the 
necessity of the measure you are to take 
for the preservation of the woman and 
child; and before you proceed to the de-
livery, empty the rectum by a stimulating 
clyster, and empty the bladder with the 
catheter, if she has not lately made water; 
then, with your fingers lubricated with 
pomatum, and placed in form of a cone, 
dilate the os externum and internum, pass 
the hand into the uterus, break the mem-
branes, turn the fœtus, and deliver by the 
feet, as before directed, or with the forceps, 
if the head be already advanced in the 
pelvis. I could not attend to these rules 
in the case before mentioned, for I was 
obliged to proceed to the delivery imme-
diately upon my arrival. 

|P_90
[}convlusions. }]
It is not my business to prescribe reme-
dies for either hysterics or convulsions. 
As women in labour seldom survive the 
latter, medical aid should be called in, when 
convulsions attack the patient. The fol-
lowing are the symptoms; dimness of sight, 
hard breathing and wheezing, convulsive 
startings, great pain in the stomach and head, 
and great fears tending to delirium. When 
these symptoms appear, it is customary to 
bleed the quantity of ten or twelve 
ounces, lay a blister on the back, and give 
from thirty to forty drops of laudanum: 
if this does not allay the symptoms, it is 
usual immediately to turn and deliver by 
the feet, or with the forceps, if the head 
be advanced in the pelvis; but the midwife 
should apprise the friends of the great dan-
ger her patient is in, and nothing but abso-
lute necessity should make her attempt the 
business at all, however great her abilities 
may be. 

|P_91
[}the descent of the funis. }]
Having spoken to this part of the subject 
in the former part of my essay, I have 
only to notice the propriety of reducing it, 
whenever it is found to descend, either 
before, or along with, any part of the 
child; for it is not returned, the circula-
tion of the blood from the mother to the 
child will be prevented, either by cold or 
compression, and that must prove fatal to 
the child. When it comes down with the 
head, that must be raised up above the 
brim of the pelvis, and the cord, which 
may be easily felt through the membranes 
should be shifted up as high as possible, and 
the patient made to take her pains in bed, 
with her loins raised higher than her shoul-
ders, till the head is properly seated in the 
pelvis. But if after all it cannot be kept 
up, you must turn and deliver by the feet, 
otherwise the child will be inevitably lost. 

|P_92
[}twins. }]
When a woman is pregnant with twins, 
her size is generally larger than with a single 
child, and she is more subject to a cough, 
swelled feet and legs, and shortness of 
breath. After she has born one child, 
you find her belly still very hard, and 
you should then, before you try to extract 
the placenta, examine by the touch, to 
know if there is another child; and if there 
is, that too must be brought before you 
bring the placenta. Both the children often 
come within a short space of time, and 
sometimes (though seldom) two or three 
days have intervened. If there are neither 
pains or floodings, some time should be 
given before you try to bring the second 
child, unless you find it lies transverse; in 
which case you must pass the hand, turn, 
and deliver by the feet. With twins we do 
not always find two different placentas, 
they are most commonly joined, and the 
membranes only separate the children. 
Where I have brought three children at a 
birth, I found but one continued placenta, 
|P_93
which of necessity must be larger, and not 
so easily extracted as that which belongs 
to a single birth, especially if it presents 
flat upon the mouth of the womb. Pains 
should be waited for to bring the placenta, 
unless there is a flooding; in that case, the 
sooner it is brought will be the better. 

|P_94
[}SECTION X. }]
[}Of the Treatment of Women after Delivery. }]
IT is supposed, that every woman who 
has studied midwifery, with a design to 
practise it, has previously attended labours, 
as an assistant to dress the child, and put 
the mother properly in bed; and though 
every nurse who attends lying-in women 
ought to know this part of the business, 
your attention is nevertheless necessary. 
There is no fixed rule for the time when a 
woman should be shifted, as it greatly de-
pends upon her strength, and the sort of 
labour she has had. If she floods, it may 
be several hours before she can be moved 
with safety, otherwise she may be moved 
in an hour and a half, or two hours, after 
delivery, which time is necessary for wash-
ing and dressing the child. Some women 
love to be delivered in their cloaths, not 
knowing that they subject themselves to the 
danger of fainting, and perhaps flooding, 
by being put in an erect posture so soon.

|P_95
The best way is to deliver women in bed, 
in their usual way of going to rest, but 
they need proper things to guard the bed; 
which things are always drawn away, when 
they are shifted with fresh linen. 

You will find many women who are so 
solicitous about preserving their shapes, 
they will have you to bind them round 
very tight with a broad bandage; in this 
you must be cautious, for if you bind them 
too hard, it may cause an inflammation of 
the uterus. 

With respect to diet, that should be light, 
consisting of chicken broth, beef tea, veal 
broth, panada, chocolate made very light, 
water cruel, &c. with all which they may 
eat toasted bread, and they should carefully 
avoid spirituous liquors. When a woman 
is free of fever, a little wine may be put 
into her gruel and panada. Animal food is 
very improper till the milk fever is over, 
and also for those women who have a keen 
appetite after delivery, (and there are such) 
for they indulge it with solid food, they 
are sure to suffer on account of it; for they 
will either take gripes and cholic, or their 
|P_96
appetite will leave them the latter part of 
the time, when they should eat hearty. 
Most women wish to get up, to have their 
bed made, much sooner than is proper or 
safe; they should never get up before they 
have lain three nights, for it is very possible 
to make their beds comfortably, without 
taking them up, and though some get up 
the second day, or night, it is at a great 
risque; for the weight and pressure of the 
bowels lie upon the yet weak and irritable 
uterus, which may produce bad effects, 
and upon this principle, they should not 
sit up in bed before three days. 

Every woman should endeavour to suckle 
her children, and no station in life, how-
ever exalted, ought to exempt a mother 
from this part of maternal duty, if she has 
milk, and her constitution is equal to it: 
a child should be put to the breast in twenty-
four hours after birth, and a first child 
much sooner, for as first children are much 
more fatigued in coming into the world, 
than future ones, we find them much less 
active in trying to take the breast; added 
to this, the mothers are very aukward in 
|P_97
applying the child, and by this means, their 
breasts are so much exposed, that they get 
great colds, and often inflamed and broken 
breasts ensue. This might be guarded 
against, by endeavouring to suckle lying 
down in the bed, and the children should 
not be fed, till they have taken the breast; 
for if, added to their fatigue, their stomachs 
are cloyed with aliment perfectly foreign 
to them, no wonder we have so much 
trouble to make them suck. If it is argued 
that they should have physic, I answer that 
the first milk has a purging quality, and 
that nature has furnished it with it, for the 
very purpose of cleansing away the meco-
nium; but if a child must suck milk which 
from its age has lost that quality, a gentle 
purge is certainly necessary, and the child 
has this advantage, that such milk is more 
free, and sucked with far less trouble. It 
is a melancholy circumstance, that many 
first children are so long before they can 
get proper nourishment from the breast, 
and of course so much fed with improper 
food, that numbers of them lose their lives 
in consequence of it. Nature has implant-
|P_98
ed, in such animals as live by suction, a 
strong propensity to suck, and it is this 
propensity that makes a child cry so vio-
lently for the breast; but unfortunately for 
it, its piteous cries are misconstrued, and 
a prodigious quantity of pap or gruel is 
poured down its throat, which lays a foun-
dation for gripes, cholic, convulsions, and 
often death. If, instead of this trash, which 
by the way is often converted to a syrup, 
by large portions of coarse sugar that 
sour upon the stomach, people would 
take pearl barley, and boil it till the liquor 
became thick like milk, strain it off, and to 
a boatful of that liquor, add a boatful of 
new milk, and give it without sugar in 
small quantities, their infants would be 
more healthy, and so many of them would 
not die in the month. To suck their food 
is far more natural and satisfactory to 
young infants, than to drink it out of a 
spoon or boat; and it is for this reason, 
that Doctor Smith wisely contrived a sort 
of tea pot, with a long spout, to suckle 
children who could not get the breast, 
knowing that they were not only more 
|P_99
pleasing to the poor infants, but that no 
gross particles, hard of digestion, could 
pass through the small perforations upon 
the spout of the pot. But how few will 
take the pains to use these pots, because 
they will not be troubled with making the 
vellum nipples that must be put upon them? 
I shall say little upon this part of the subject, 
as most families consult their apothecaries 
about the dieting of ther children, and 
about their diseases, when they contract 
any. 


[^1. 
* Were young women before marriage, to take the 
opinion of experienced midwives, concerning their abi-
lities to bear children, we should not see so many 
unfortunate labours. ^]
[^2. 
* It would appear, that Louis was more attentive to 
the virtue of his mistress, than some men in our day 
are to the virtue of their wives.^]
[^3. 
* Softness of the bones.^]