
|P_
[}PRELIMINARY INTRODUCTION 
TO 
SEA-BATHING.}]
IT may be proper to inform the reader, that, 
in compliance with the request of some highly 
distinguished gentlemen of the faculty, I have 
undertaken to write on the nature, power, influ- 
ence, and effect of Sea-water and Sea-bathing, 
cold and hot, and submitted the manuscripts to 
be read before a learned Medical Society, in 
London; and also to be reviewed by sundry learned 
medical friends; and the reports on them are 
highly flattering, but which it may be prudent to 
conceal till the public opinion is known. 

The subject matter, thus assigned me to sift and 
handle, is sufficiently interesting; and stands in 
|P_4
much need of farther investigation. Sea-bath- 
ing is certainly more practised, at the present day, 
than a knowledge of it is yet possessed. There 
is in it great room to advance, explain, en- 
force, and restrain. What I deliver shall, 
though connected, be in distinct tracts, in or- 
der to relieve the reader, and make them come 
easy to the purchaser: the whole will be the re- 
sult of long practical experience, and the facts 
supported by respectable living evidence, of gen- 
tlemen of the faculty on the coast, and long-stand- 
ing sagacious sea-bathing guides, male and female, 
at Margate. Where any thing is left doubtful or 
equivocal, it is for professional men, resident at the 
sea-watering places, to advance a step farther, and 
add to, and refine on, my arguments, and the im- 
portance of the design; and by their being thus 
faithful interpreters of the hidden treasures of 
nature, will manifest themselves to be what they 
profess, the guardians of health, and the truly 
adopted sons and heirs of Apollo, the Inventor 
of Medicine. Divisum sic breve fiet opus. None 
else are, or can be competent to the task; as sea- 
bathing involves in it a knowledge of the animal 
œconomy, and of general medical practice, found- 
ed on just physical reasoning; call it theory if 
you will. Experience without nice conception of 
the truths necessary, demonstrable by reason, to 
enable us to draw just deductions from the pheno- 
|P_5
mena, for application to particular objects, is no 
experience at all: it is worse than none; for it 
involves in obscurity, and fixes an idea in the 
mind, narrow in its compass, hazardous in the en- 
terprize, and often false in the conclusion; so that 
it brings nothing to the temple of truth and know- 
ledge; and, neither promotes, completes, or ac- 
tuates to new inventions or any useful discovery of 
the several dependencies, causes, and connexion of 
things, so far as comes within the ken of human 
intelligence. All theory beyond this, is as vain 
and fruitless as that of simple curs barking and 
leaping after the wild birds of the sky, or at the 
light of, and specks in the moon. There is not 
the same Libertas philosophica in Ars Medica as in 
Licentia poetica for the flights of fancy. As spe- 
culative literature is baseless, our faith is left free; 
nothing less than solid truth can be rested on; it 
is the great barrier against the floods of error, 
ignorance, and sceptical hypothesis, or fictious so- 
phistry. In truth, there is certitude, of what is 
good or bad: in ignorance, diffidence, doubt, and 
danger. 

So want of knowing truth doth fools delude, 
And error from the right way doth exclude, 
All those that doubt;—
Horace.
The Stoics esteem him mad who is blindly led by 
ignorance instead of truth. Diffidence and obsti- 
|P_6
nacy, though opposite in themselves, are both in 
the line of defection. Diffidence is no just excuse 
for the concealment of an important fact; others 
may theorize thereon. Theory helps us out in the 
knowledge of reasons and causes, for settling our 
judgments upon the best and most rational prin- 
ciples. 

Theory and practice, like two heavenly bodies, 
attract light on each other: the one without the 
other is like the statue of Polyphemus without an 
eye, or a lamp without oil. Every man hath some 
theory or other—good or bad:—his cannot be 
wrong whose practice is uniformly successful: it 
is in full proof, if actions are allowed to be stronger 
than words. In strict logic, it is not allowed to 
pass from the hypothesis to the thesis: the hypo- 
thetical principle must be proved, before the conse- 
quences can be admitted: opinion must be implant- 
ed, or resolution determined, before reasons for that 
opinion can be known: illustration and just repre- 
sentation, by example, is required to enlighten 
and instruct the understanding, or the truth of a 
doctrine cannot be confirmed, or its principles 
established. Sir Isaac Newton says, "As in ma- 
thematics, so in natural philosophy, the investiga- 
tion of difficult things, by way of analysis, ought 
ever to precede the method of composition. This 
analysis consists in making experiments and ob- 
|P_7
servations, and in drawing general conclusions 
from them by induction, and admitting of no 
objections against the conclusions, but such as are 
taken from experiments and observations, or other 
certain truths: and although the arguing from 
experiments and observations by induction, be no 
demonstration of general conclusions, yet it is the 
best way of reasoning, which the nature of things 
admit of, and may be looked upon as so much the 
stronger, by how much the induction is more 
general: and if no exception occur from phe- 
nomena, the conclusion may be pronounced ge- 
nerally. But if at any time afterwards, any 
exceptions do occur from experiments, it may 
be pronounced, with such exceptions as shall occur. 
By this way of analysis, we may proceed from 
compounds to ingredients, and from motions to 
the forces producing them; and in general from 
effects to their causes, and from particular causes 
to more general ones, till the argument ends in 
the most general." Op. p. 380. l. 31. 

The theory required, founded on the light of 
nature, concerning man, his diseases, affections, 
(bodily and mental) dependencies, mutations, di- 
versisications, resistances, sympathies and antipa- 
thies, indicating and contra-indicating symptoms, 
concordant and discordant opinions and principles, 
together with the force and influence of the pla- 
|P_8
netary system on our orb, is infinite, obscure, 
and marvellous to human wisdom, yet does honour 
to the eternal immutable Being, who hath not 
only created, but preserveth the variety. There 
is nothing without its counteracting opponent: 
there is no disease without its antidote: vice, hath 
virtue: hatred, love: malevolence, charity:—the- 
orists oppose; and, by their opposing opinions, 
truth comes out, and the arts and sciences are 
refined and improved. This system of opposition 
is maintained throughout the whole animal and 
vegetable creation: 
All nature is but art unknown to thee; 
All chance, direction, which thou canst not see; 
All discord, harmony not understood; 
All partial Evil, universal Good: 
And, spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite, 
One truth is clear, Whatever is, is Right.
Pope.

All theories may be referred to the general 
laws of motion. Sea-bathing comprehends in it 
the powers and qualities of fluidity, gravity, pres- 
sure, attraction, repulsion, stimulation, friction, at- 
trition, and velocity; cold, heat, humidity, dry- 
ness, effluvia, &c. 

If what I offer to the public shall meet with a 
reception equal to the intention, to awaken and per- 
suade my fellow creatures, upon rational grounds, 
to keep out of the road that leads to pain, sorrow, 
|P_9
and premature death, and embrace health, that 
inestimable blessing which gives relish to all our 
enjoyments, my ambition will be amply gratified 
in being permitted to add my mite to the public 
fund of preservatory knowledge. 

Although I write from the locality of my situ- 
ation, yet the observations I have made, the 
important facts I have industriously collected, 
and the dubious points I have more fully as- 
certained, are so general as to serve equally well 
for every other eligible sea-bathing place at home 
or abroad. 

Neither the advantages of Sea-bathing, at Mar- 
gate, nor the salubrious property of the air of 
Thanet, have hitherto commanded medical atten- 
tion equal to what their importance deserve, 
consequently are not sufficiently known to the 
public. Res ipsa loquitur. Sea-bathing has cer- 
tainly worked its own way more than by any 
industry of the saculty.

During twelve years and upwards that I resided 
at Kingston, Surry, before I came to Margate,
though I was allowed to be fortunate, under 
heaven, in relieving pain and distress, yet I wish 
to throw a veil over my ignorance of the power 
and effects of Sea-bathing, as of those I recom- 
|P_10
mended to it, some returned no better, some 
worse; and some I sent to the cold sea-bath 
whom I ought to have sent to the warm, et vice 
versa, which I candidly acknowledged in my 
Medical Remarks the moment I knew better, 
wherefore there is but too much room to 
conclude, that all those who returned benefit- 
ted, were more indebted to chance than to 
any precise judgment or theory of mine. I 
have to plead for it, I was an inland practiser, 
when all my knowledge of it was derived from 
the very few practical treatises I had seen, or 
could obtain on the subject; and neither of those 
I saw were so perfect as to give me adequate ideas 
of it for practice: some, in some things, egre- 
giously misled me: some others were misled them- 
selves; and it making no part of academical 
education, my mind was not prompted to consider 
the efficacy of Sea-water as any thing beyond that 
of a mere wash for a foul skin, whereas there is 
no part, I will say, of the whole materia medica,
yet known so extensively efficacious, under judi- 
cious direction, or detrimental, under indiscreet, 
ill-timed management. If it was not capable of 
doing harm, it would be incapable of doing good. 

In those simples which dwell the most viru- 
lent poisons, dwell also, the most potent, salutary 
virtues: 
|P_11
There is some soul goodness in things evil, 
Would men observingly distil it out. 
SHAKESPEARE. 

The most capital things of nature lie generally 
out of the common track; and, therefore the man 
who aims at great and useful discovery, must 
take much upon himself, for few will follow until 
the point is fully ascertained; and it is well if he 
does not meet with discouragement for his diligent 
inquiry. 

In proportion to our confidence, proficiency, 
and enlarged views of nature, so are the miseries 
of mankind abridged, and the means are multi- 
plied for yielding a comfortable existence. It 
is for me, and for every one of us, who under- 
take the important charge of lives, to open and 
expand our ideas, for receiving more ample and 
more enlarged views of the discoverable things of 
nature, her silent ways, the dispensations of pro- 
vidence, and the exigencies of man; which, if 
every one did, we should see fewer improper 
objects arrive at the sea-watering places, with 
very inadequate directions and large packages 
of compounded drugs, which no rational practi- 
tioner, physician, or apothecary, can act with and 
under, by which some have severely suffered, 
others received no benefit, and the water forsooth, 
|P_12
blamed for what it had no hand in. Lamentabili 
dictu!—None have fuffered at Margate, ex- 
cept the indiscreet and unthinking, or who have 
been so unfortunate as to be badly advised and 
injudiciously directed, no matter whether by those 
on the coast or inland, who have not yet acquired 
a competent knowledge of the state, qualities, 
powers, order, affinity, and appropriation of the 
objects of nature to the seminal and radical causes 
of distemper, or the patients ability of body to 
sustain the proposed means for receiving relief. 

I have observed some to have come, and, under 
judicious direction, receive much benefit; come 
a second time, resting on their own judgment and 
experience, and suffer. 

Those who are dead and insensible to all the 
warm emotions and pleasing sensations that result 
from the act of self-preservation—the amor sui— 
we cannot expect to resuscitate. I say with Horace:

Let none but learned doctors physic give, 
Let each mechanic by his calling live. 

And with Pliny:
The arts would be happy if only artists might judge of 
them and practise them. 

By an improper application of sea-bathing, 
through ignorance, the intention of the bath is 
|P_13
frustrated, the symptoms of a complaint aggra- 
vated, new fatal ones brought on, and the voice 
of nature is silenced. That eloquent, and much 
enlightened genius, the late Dr. John Morgan,
Professor of Medicine in the College of Philadel- 
phia, in his Anniversary Discourse, published in 
1765, has the following spirited passage, which 
does honour to his humanity. 

"Should we," says he, "for a moment turn 
our eyes upon the man, who dares to enter upon 
the practice of physic, without being properly 
initiated into the science, or instructed in the 
important duties of the profession, he would soon 
present us with a melancholy prospect. If not 
past all feelings of humanity, what compunctions 
of conscience, what remorse would not fill his 
breast from practising at random and in the dark; 
not knowing whether his prescriptions might prove 
a wholesome remedy or a destructive poison. To 
discover the nature of an uncommon disease, or 
to account for an unusual symptom, puzzles his 
invention.—Ignorant of every true principle, from 
which, by just reasoning, he might be able to 
deduce practical inferences, he knows not what 
prognostic to make, or what plan of treatment to 
observe—Unsteady and irresolute, he attempts a 
variety of means; such as either avail not, or such 
as heighten the danger of the disease, already too 
|P_14
violent, he may thus interrupt the salutary at- 
tempts of nature, or, not knowing how to second 
them, tamper with the life of the patient, and idly 
waiting to see what nature herself is capable of 
doing, neglect to succour her, till it is too late, 
and the fatal hand of death is just closing the 
gloomy scene.—Wretched is the case of those 
whom chance, or misinformed judgment, shall 
throw into his hands, to fall victims of his te- 
merity—Great is the havock which his ignorance 
spreads on every side, robbing the affectionate 
husband of his darling spouse, or rendering the 
tender wife a helpless widow;—increasing the 
number of orphans;—mercilessly depriving them 
of their parents support;—bereaving the afflicted 
parents of their only comfort and hope, by the 
untimely death of their beloved infants, and lay- 
ing whole families desolate. Remorseless soe to 
human kind! Actuated by more than savage cru- 
elty! Hold, hold, thy exterminating hand!— 

"Glad should I be to moderate this too exact 
description of the effects of ignorant and pre- 
sumptuous practice; but what judgment can we 
pass on those, who have been scarcely instructed 
in the first elements of medical science, and yet 
force themselves into practice, as if they meant to 
sport themselves with human life and human ca- 
lamities?" 

|P_15
If medicine be allowed to be a great blessing in 
the hands of the sagacious and wise, and as a 
sword in the hands of the foolish and furious, so 
is sea-bathing. Too much being assumed and 
taken for granted, is the reason so little progress has 
hitherto been made in its theory for guiding the 
hand of practice. The greatest enemy to wisdom 
and prudence is precipitation. 

Nine years ago I happened to come to  Mar- 
cate in quest of strength, after a long and severe 
fever; and receiving a very sensible benefit the first 
season by sea-bathing, and the salubrious air of 
Thanet, I was thereon led to make inquiry into 
their special effects on other visitors, and what I 
actually saw, and was credibly informed of by some 
of the bathing guides, I thought important, and it 
not being generally known, I immediately pub- 
lished it in my Medical Remarks on Evacuations.
Since that time, I have had frequent opportunity 
of observing more minutely their effects on others 
under various states, circumstances, and conditions 
of body: in simple and complicated, acute and 
chronic, casual and inherent complaints; and every 
year's experience gives manifold proofs of their 
very great utility to health: they restore and pre- 
serve. There are but few distempers incident to 
human nature in which either the cold, the warm, 
or vapour sea-water bath, and the air of a salu- 
brious spot on the margin of the main, such as 
|P_16
Thanet, are not equal to meet and prove more 
or less beneficial in. I have seen, on a well di- 
rected course, diseases not only palliated, but 
many cured by them, after having baffled the power 
of medicine in rational artists hands. These baths 
are certainly most excellent auxiliaries to medi- 
cine, diet, exercise, and amusement, as these are 
to them, which accounts for the great flux and 
re-flux of company, from the king to the beggar, 
to, and from the sea-watering places, during the 
temperate seasons; 
Where Baths give vigour and the Waters health. 

Or, as a late ingenious Margate visitant to 
mount Parnassus describes it; 

The briny wave doth thousands save, 
Alike from Grave and Crutches; 
Makes Aged young, the feeble strong, 
Or Beggar, Duke, or Duchess. 
Coleman.

Sea-water is not a mere simple homogeneous 
elemental fluid simplex simplicitur, but nature's 
richly saturated compound. It contains, say che- 
mical philosophers, a muriatic bitter purging salt, 
calcarious earth, and sulphureous bitumen: and 
Boyle, and other naturalists agree in there being a 
subtle ætherial spirit in water, which some call 
fixed air, some phlogiston or inflammable air, 
besides a pure air, which airs become elastic, as 
seen by the sparkling air bubbles. 

|P_17
The proportion of the principles of sea-water 
vary in some distant seas, and in deep and in 
shallow water: some say the sea is more salt in 
summer than in winter, warmer in a tempest than 
in a calm. There is in sea-water, besides its ori- 
ginal native principles, the impregnation of sub- 
marine plants, such as the Quercus Marinus, or 
sea-wreck, and other plants; the slime, sperm, 
and excrementitious parts of fishes; their, and 
other dead bodies, rain, dew, hail, snow, springs, and 
the disemboguing of rivers and ponds; together 
with fossils, minerals, and the refuse of ships, &c. 
the combination of all which heterogeneous par- 
ticles render sea-water, on stagnation and being 
close kept, quickly corruptible. After a long 
calm at sea the stench is very offensive, and that 
which issues forth on opening a cask of sea-water, 
that has been kept for some time in the hold of a ship, 
is intolerable, nay deadly. If it were not for the 
tides there would be no living near the sea in a calm. 
As the ærial spirit in waters is extremely fugitive, 
they are all better drank on the spot than at a dis- 
tance, and the more they are crowded with their 
principles they spoil the sooner. 

The sea-beach on the coast of Thanet is made 
up of fine sand, intermixed with chalk that breaks 
off from the cliffs after intense long continued 
frost, and is melted by the flowing tides: those 
|P_18
cliffs that gave to Britain the ancient name of 
Albion:

That pale, that white-faced shore, 
Whose foot spurns back th' ocean's roaring tides. 
SHAKESPEARE. 

Thus, there is a bottom that is remarkably clean, 
soft, smooth, yet invariably firm and gently sloping 
from the fending banks, which render Thanet's coast 
very inviting to bathe. 

The sea-water at Margate is not only pure, 
but strong of its native principles, by reason no 
rivers run into the ocean to make it muddy and 
brackish nearer than the Thames and Medway,
both thirty miles to the westward, and these re- 
pelled back again by the flood tide. 

The first three or four years I stood a mere 
spectator and inquirer into the power, influence, 
and effects of sea-bathing before ever I thought 
myself competent to direct a course of it: it was 
to me a new study, though an ancient practice; 
for Homer tells us, that Ulysses and his comrades 
bathed in warm water and in the sea to refresh 
themselves after fatigue, before they dined. He 
mentions purifyng the Atrides in the sea. 

Although we have the testimony and suffrage of 
some of the greatest philosophers and sage phy- 
|P_19
sicians, in the different ages of the world, for the 
cold spring and soft tepid baths being the most uni- 
versal remedies in the whole compass of nature; 
yet in a medicinal light they are far, very far inferior 
in efficacy to the warm and cold sea-water baths, 
only they are not so convenient or so easy for all, 
at all times, to come at. If few speak for, few 
speak against them, because they are not compe- 
tent of their power and effects; and, if they are 
not of their ill as well as good, we cannot take 
their silence to be suffrage. 

At first I met with much difficulty in obtaining 
intelligence; for the faculty, and the sea-bathing 
guides at Margate, all told me they never had 
been put on the line of observing; for, if they 
had, they said they could have furnished me with 
many important facts of the power and effect, both 
good and ill, of sea-bathing: 

They build on sands, which unmov'd they find, 
'Tis because there was no wind.  COWLEY. 

And my not meeting with a scrip on the subject in 
any of the libraries that afforded me the least sa- 
tisfaction, I had to persevere in wading through 
thick shades of darkness till I came into fair light, 
when I clearly saw the impropriety of their re- 
ceiving all that came without exeeption, as if sea- 
|P_20
bathing was an universal sovereign specific remedy 
for all complaints, whatever were their nature or 
cause; was proper at all times, and suited to all 
constitutions, temperaments, states, and conditions 
of body, modes of living; and that by one mode of 
bathing only, and of pushing the bath indiscrimi- 
nately beyond what nature can bear. Can there be 
any error, theoretical or practical, more absurd or 
unphilosophical? Art is subservient to nature; 
to relieve, polish, and improve nature. If nature 
and art do not go hand in hand, and mutually 
accord, nothing will be perfected or established 
in any art or science. Nature will be led, but 
not driven. 

Although many discoveries are made in natural 
history, yet many are still to make, and the point 
of view necessary to place many things in for a 
just application is still much wanting, defective, 
and but imperfectly understood. This we may 
apply to sea-bathing as much as to any part of 
medical practice. When we talk of sea-bathing 
being efficacious in this, or in that complaint, we 
must mean to comprehend with it the state and 
condition of body at the time it has to operate 
upon. The cold spring and soft tepid baths may 
almost wholly be referred to strictum and laxum,
even the Sainted Wells, in which they are very 
powerful. 

|P_21
Having seven years ago cautioned the  Mar- 
gate bathing guides against receiving any 
ailing persons, except with, and by the suf- 
frage of the faculty; and the guides them- 
selves seeing the propriety of this, from some un- 
fortunate accidents that happened that season and 
before, to improper and unprepared persons; to 
some of whom I had been called, but too late in 
some instances for ##t to restore; I have not seen or 
heard of any since suffering violence by sea-bathing. 
I had no other way to prevent embarrassment 
that might in future acrue to ignorant and misled 
persons. The guides were not to blame; they 
were not competent, and their bread depends 
wholly on the multiplicity that bathe. We must 
rather impute to visitors themselves neglecting to 
apply for proper advice on the spot, which the 
poorest person that comes recommended may 
have. The French have a true saying of the 
English in respect to their health, which is, "that 
they do not think themselves sick soon enough, 
and they think themselves well too soon." 

Notwithstanding of the many drawbacks on sea- 
bathing, whilst the bountiful ocean answers the 
peremptory demands of thousands and tens of thou- 
sands of proper claiments every year, it must ever 
be solicited aad embraced by the sons and daugh- 
ters of affliction. Still it is no universal panacea;
|P_22
its gifts are by no means appropriated for, or dis- 
pensed to all; nor are all applicants equally ca- 
pable of receiving them. There neither is, or 
can be any universal remedy to supersede all the 
other parts of GOD'S creation:—do away all de- 
grees of comparison—invert the order of nature, 
and leave nothing for the inquiry, intelligence, 
or employment of man: 

Take but degree away, unhinge that string, 
And hark what discord follows: each thing meets 
In mere appugnancy. 
Shakespeare.

A generous cordial to a person fainting and 
satigued, is a comfortable reviving thing, but fiery 
ardent spirit to one with a hot stomach and in- 
flamed blood, is adding fuel to the fire, or like 
giving a man a soporiferous draught in a le- 
thargy. How often, alas! have I seen the misery 
of a disorder thus confirmed by injudicious, ill- 
timed administration, that a judicious physician 
would, by quite an opposite treatment, have easily 
subdued. How often, on the other hand, have I 
rejoicingly beheld many a valuable life, that had 
been dispaired of by one set of men, restored 
speedily by others, who attended more minutely 
to the nice discriminating circumstances of nature, 
for facilitating the means she uses in her conflict 
with death. Though fifteen or twenty years since, 
some of these live useful members of society; yet 
|P_23
how few are these, comparatively speaking, to the 
number of drowned persons restored annually to 
life by the Humane Society, after vital action in 
the heart, arteries and respiratory organs, had, for 
almost an incredible length of time, been sus- 
pended? And also to the number of great cures 
performed in our hospitals, after the complaints 
had baffled the art of sagacious private practisers? 
which shews the advantage of art where rational 
men of the faculty have strict justice done to their 
practice: 

Hoc est 
Vivere bis posse priore frui. 

Every instance of resuscitation corroborates to 
serve as a spur to us not to abandon nature too 
soon in her difficulties, when we every day see 
what she is capable of doing for giving relief in 
distress, with a little judicious well-timed help: 
but though the benignant hand of providence 
continues to anticipate on many occasions, the 
interposition of art by effecting her own work; yet 
men of judgment, understanding, experience, and 
observation, know that she is frequently inter- 
rupted and retarded therein by the officious hands 
of ignorance, temerity, and professional juglers.

An honest man's the noblest work of God. 
Perseverence in doing good to our distressed 
fellow creatures is the crown and perfection of all 
|P_24
virtues: every other principle of virtue attends it. 
If there are any ulcered souls that think this a bur- 
then, or a drawback on trade, let not their judg- 
ment counteract or silence the voice of nature— 
the will of their creator and preserver. Let them 
consider, if the world was made for Cæsar, it was 
for Titus too. 

Those only who are in familiar habits with na- 
ture, can know any thing of her ways and the 
methods she takes in causing, and carrying off 
disease, and purifying the blood of noxious par- 
ticles, that associate with the mass and bear down 
the fabric. The art is not to render the blood by 
the remedy in a worse state than it found it; which 
every medicine will do if injudiciously used, and 
the most potent one too the soonest. 

To treat a disease rationally, it is not only ne- 
cessary to know the remedy, but the natural con- 
stitution and acquired diathesis of the blood it has 
to act upon. The sagacious physician has many 
signs and tokens given him for his guide in the 
local and universal complaint; even the aspect of 
the countenance on the bed of sickness serves to 
enable him to make a genuine presage of the issue. 
This is called the semiotic or art of presaging by 
exterior signs. The disease, constitution, state, 
and nature's indications (salutary and erroneous) 
|P_25
being known, she instantly presents to his en- 
lightened mind what is calculated for opposing the 
morbid symptoms, and bringing relief out of the 
abundant stock from his extensive researches, un- 
der the protection of an all-attentive providence, 
without being tossed on the fluctuating wave of 
conjectural opinion or uncertainty: thus experi- 
ence founded on analogy and comparative fact, 
imparts her observations to reason, and enables 
it to support, by fair evidence, solid conclusions 
against the common enemy ignorance, which saps 
the foundation, and undermines all genuine learn- 
ing. Example hath the force of command. 

Scientific principles certainly rest on præcognita,
fixed, leading, or standing self-evident axioms, 
which are the objects of our senses—come within 
the sphere or cognizance of our intellectual facul- 
ties, and are consistent with reason and truth: on 
these science is enlarged and improved. Medi- 
cal science being the most extensive of any, it 
taking in the whole compass and domain of nature, 
many things are yet beyond the amplitude of our 
intellectual view; and therefore its supporting pil- 
lars cannot all be reckoned, and our philosophy 
has not taught us to reduce infinite variety to di- 
finite limitation without loss. How narrow and 
unstable all the systems of medical theory yet ex- 
tant! every one having been so sullied by the 
|P_26
improvements of the succeeding generation, that 
there is not one that has yet stood the test of half 
a century. Hippocrates'(pater noster artes me- 
dicæ) excepted, which will stand as long as nature 
is true to herself: upon it we may make new ac- 
quests every day, it having endless store to improve 
on, but upon none else that I know. How short 
and fluctuating the College Catalogue of remedies 
to natures plan of the materia medica, as if all the 
rest beyond it were an useless mass of rubbish, only 
fit for being cast away, while Deus et natura nihil fa- 
eiunt frustra.Cicero, in his Academicks, speaks 
almost in these words: "I do not direct my thoughts 
to the little bear but the great bear, called Helice
or Charles' wain, those famous seven north stars; that 
is, my ideas are to be enlarged, not narrowed, and 
therefore I must wander and expatiate a great deal 
farther. Absolute restriction is giving at once an 
effectual check to the spirit of inquiry, and locking 
up the human understanding in the dark vale of 
ignorance. The most enlightened genius, with 
every advantage, knows but in part; and all that 
physicians do, or can know of nature, may be re- 
solved into principles of observation and physical 
fact. Their researches and disquisitions into oc- 
cult and inscrutable paths; such as primordial ef- 
ficient causes and inbred virtues, or to unravel that 
combination of causes which we call chance, more 
especially super-natural causes and their influences, 
|P_27
would be fruitless, vain, arrogant, and bewildering, 
if not irreverent, that being nature itself; and na- 
ture is the art of the Godhead. 

The dark profundity of heav'ns high plan, 
Is known to angels, but conceal'd from man. 
It is well if we can obtain a side glance, or a 
passing smile. 

Though much remains to be discovered before 
we arrive at the ne plus ultra, yet enough is dis- 
covered of things and their virtues, to enable the 
human mind to form just ideas of the infinite 
wisdom, power, justice, and goodness of the great 
God of universal nature, whose benificence pours 
forth and discloses his blessings to every living 
thing, conducted by fixed and immutable laws, and 
the rule and order of his dispensation is the felicity 
of the universe.

In every flow'r that blooms, or shrub that grows, 
The Godhead smiles triumphant o'er his Foes. 
Or, as Lucretius more fully has it; 

God is in sea, and land, and air, and sky, 
What would we more, all is Deity. 
Whate'er we see, or wheresoe'er we go, 
We must see God, whether we will or no. 

After what is said in this preliminary dis- 
course, it will appear evident to the rational 
|P_28
reader, that inasmuch as it is for physicians, and 
their brethren of the faculty, at the sea-watering 
places to explore and industriously acquire a com- 
petent knowledge of the nature, power, influence, 
and effect of sea-bathing, and its essential sup- 
porting auxilliaries for the relief of pain, agony, 
and distress; it is for visitors themselves not to be 
too indolent or refractory, to taking, and being 
guided by reason and judicious counsel on the 
spot, not only previous to, but from time to time, 
during a course of bathing, to prevent embar- 
rassment, and to allow the bath to have fair play 
for answering the end and intention of it; for no 
writer can lay down rules to answer all and every 
one's case invariably; therefore to act laudably 
and gain success is the triumph of wisdom; it is 
the way to be acquainted with nature: 

Know all the good that individuals find, 
Or God or Nature meant to mere mankind; 
Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense, 
Lie in three words, Health, Peace, and Competence.
Pope. 

END OF THE INTRODUCTION. 
