

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_9[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PART I. }][^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
EXPERIMENTS, CAUTIONS, and CASES, 
tending to illustrate the medicinal use of 
Factitious Airs, and of other substances, 
of which the application to Medicine has been 
suggested by modern philosophical disco- 
veries. 
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}I.—Of the Atmosphere. }]
IT is proved, by satisfactory experiments, that the 
inferior region of the atmosphere consists of two 
kinds of air, quite distinct in many properties. One is 
the kind called Vital, Dephlogisticated, or 
Oxygene Air, and by a variety of names besides. The 
other has been named Azotic, Phlogisticated, 
Foul, or Bad Air. Where the lower atmosphere is 
not altered by the breathing of animals, the burning of 
fuel, by exhalations from subterraneous chemical pro- 
cesses or putrefying substances, and such local causes, if 
you confine and examine an hundred cubic inches, you 
will find twenty-seven or twenty-eight to be oxygene, 
and the remaining seventy-two or seventy-three azotic 
|P_10
air. The manner in which air may be analysed, is 
described in the writings of Dr. Priestley, Mr. Scheele, 
Mr. Cavendish, and Mr. Lavoisier. These authors 
explain much of the nature of oxygene and azotic air. 
A candle burns in a vessel full of oxygene air with 
dazzling brilliancy, and is consumed with great rapi- 
dity. This air unites with various substances, and 
turns them sour, as beer and milk. Blood taken from a 
vein is of a dark or livid colour; oxygene makes it 
bright, florid or ruddy. You may see this difference 
by breaking a clot of blood that has stood a little time 
in the air; the surface will be crimson, the inside dark, 
and the dark part, now become the surface, will turn 
ruddy, though covered with serum. When black 
blood is put into azotic air, it does not become ruddy. 
Azotic air extinguishes flame, does not burn when 
mixed, or in contact with common air, and is not 
absorbed by lime-water. 

Near the earth, these two airs are found mixed with 
surprising exactness. Take a cubic foot from ten dif- 
ferent places, and you will find that a little more than 
a quarter of each is oxygene; the rest azotic air. 
There is often likewise found a little carbonic acid air, 
as one part in an hundred, though no fires burn, or 
animals breathe near.—The nice balance of attraction 
between the two constituent parts of the atmosphere, 
deserves notice. These two substances, when closely 
united, form nitrous acid: If, therefore, they were 
not, by some circumstances, prevented from uniting 

closely, all the oxygene, with part of the azote, would 
be changed into an highly corrosive acid, and the 
|P_11
waters of our globe would be converted into aquafortis. 
Again, azotic is lighter than oxygene air; if, therefore, 
they had not some attraction, they might separate, and 
any animals, that should be immersed in an atmo- 
sphere of azotic air, would almost instantly expire: 
The undiluted oxygene remaining below would, as we 
shall presently see, occasion violent diseases in man, 
as well in many other animals. 

[}II.—Of the breathing of man and similar animals. }]
Fix a pipe to a bladder full of air, and, holding your 
nostrils, breathe the air for some time, and your dis- 
tressed feelings will inform you that it is no longer fit 
for breathing. If you transfer this breathed air into an 
inverted glass jar full of water, and turn up the jar so 
as to keep in the air, and admit none from the atmo- 
sphere, you will find that it extinguishes a candle, and 
destroys the life of a small animal, dipped into it. If 
you procure another quantity of such air, and add to it 
a little more than one fourth of oxygene air, a candle 
will burn in it just as in the atmosphere; and you may 
breathe it as long as so much fresh air, though it is not 
exactly the same; for it contains, after being breathed, 
some fixed or carbonic acid air, either thrown out 
from the blood, or formed in the lungs. These expe- 
riments indicate, that breathing renders common air 
unfit for supporting life or flame, by depriving it of 
oxygene. Various other experiments shew further that 
this is the case. The blood, before it passes through 
the lungs, is dark; after passing, it is florid; dark 
blood in a bladder, exposed to the atmosphere, be- 
comes florid superficially; and in breathing, the blood 
|P_12
and air are only separated by membranes not unlike a 
bladder. When dark blood is introduced into vessels 
containing oxygene or common air, the blood be- 
comes ruddy, and the air is reduced in quantity. 
Hence it appears, that the blood constantly drinks up 
a portion of the oxygene air received into the lungs; 
and from various considerations I conclude that it is 
consumed in the contraction of the muscles, and in the 
formation of several fluids, secreted from the blood; 
for the blood, after traversing the body, comes back 
to the lungs, dark, or without the oxygene, which it 
received in passing through them. In saying that this 
principle is consumed, I mean no more than that it en- 
ters into new combinations; quitting the blood and 
muscular fibres, and forming perhaps an ingredient in 
those salts which the bones and fluids are found to 
contain.—It has been calculated, that, an healthy man 
requires about five cubic feet of air, or 11/2 cubic feet 
nearly of oxygene air, every hour. 

So much is premised to render the following expe- 
riments and speculations intelligible to some readers. 
—They will find more in Dr. Goodwin's connection of 
life with respiration, Mr. Coleman's dissertation on 
suspended respiration, Dr. Menzies' Tentamen de respi- 
ratione (Annales de Chimie, 1791, p. 211), in my 
three publications on the propriety of employing 
elastic fluids in various disorders, and the chemical 
authors already quoted. 

It appears that the skin imbibes and exhales air. It 
will imbibe various kinds; but, as it is found in equal 
times to take in three or four times as much oxygene 
|P_13
air as any other, it probably selects oxygene alone from 
the atmosphere. Some philosophers suppose the hu- 
man species to have existed in a monkey state; would 
the hair then so much prevent the cutaneous absorption 
of oxygene as the cloaths at present?—From these 
experiments it has been also conjectured that immer- 
sion of the naked body or limbs in different airs might 
cure diseases. See Dr. Ewart on Cancer, Dilly, Lon- 
don. Monthly Review for November, 1794, p. 301. 

[}III.—Though the proportion of oxygene in the atmosphere 
may be best adapted to the average state of health, may 
the proportion not be smaller than is beneficial in some 
disorders, and larger than in others? }]
Considerate persons will, I conceive, reply, that 
this is probable. I have made many experiments on 
animals, to illustrate the effect of atmospheres of va- 
rious constitutions. I should have made more, had I 
not been absent from England, or otherwise occupied 
for a good part of the last 12 months. No investigation 
of greater importance or extent, can be imagined. 
This is only a rude beginning. Others will assist in 
continuing the enquiry. 

[}IV.—The effect of breathing oxygene air little diluted. }]
Dr. Priestley and Mr. Lavoisier found animals 
either to die, or to become exceedingly ill in such air, 
while it continues more oxygenated than the atmo- 
sphere, and will support the life of other animals. It 
is not then defect, but excess of oxygene, that is perni- 
cious here. The heart and arteries pulsate more quick- 
ly and forcibly; the eyes grow red and seem to pro- 
|P_14
trude; the heat of the body is said considerably to in- 
crease [/1./], sweat to break out over the whole body, 
and fatal mortification of the lungs to come on. These 
appearances denote violent inflammation: animals 
have always appeared to me to suffer extremely, soon 
after immersion in unmixed oxygene air. The human 
species, I think, will be found to vary as widely in the 
manner in which this elastic fluid affects various indi- 
viduals as in any quality whatsoever. Some, I have 
observed, not to be very sensibly affected by it when 
respired pure. To my own lungs, it feels like ardent 
spirits applied to the palate; and I have often thought 
I could not survive the inspiration of oxygene air as it 
is driven from manganese by heat many minutes. 
The production of inflammation is fully established by 
dissection, as others have found, and as appeared from 
the following experiment:—A large kitten was kept 
seventeen hours in a vessel containing several cubic 
feet of air from manganese, of which about eighty 
parts in an hundred might be oxygene. This, and ano- 
ther kitten of nearly the same size, which had lived as 
usual, were then dissected in my presence, by Mr. 
Guillemard, of St. John's College, Oxford, who im- 
mediately made the following minute of the appear- 
ances:— The lungs were of a florid red colour in the 
oxygenated kitten (A); in the other (B), they were 
pale; the difference was very striking, both in the 
inflated and uninflated state; the edge of one lobe 
in A was marked, with livid spots (as in mortifi- 
cation). The pleura was likewise evidently inflamed. 
The heart in A was of a florid red colour. The 
|P_15
liver, kidneys, spleen, and blood-vessels of the me- 
sentery and urinary bladder, were of a brightish red 
colour. In B, the heart was of a deepish colour. 
The liver, spleen, kidneys, and blood-vessels in ge- 
neral, were of a bluish or purple colour. Both kit- 
tens had been successively killed by immersion under 
water. Upon opening the head of A, there was no 
appearance of inflammation.—The blood vessels had 
rather a florid colour; but there was no sign of ex- 
travasation, or more than the usual quantity of blood. 
In B, on raising the skull, there appeared a quantity 
of blood between the bones and the membranes of 
the brain, of which the blood-vessels were turgid 
with dark-coloured blood. 

In A, the heart readily obeyed the stimulus of prick- 
ing: The spontaneous contractions of the right au- 
ricle and ventricle were frequent; they continued 
with little diminution of frequency and force for 
above half an hour. In about an hour, they had 
wholly ceased. 

In B, the irritability of the heart was at first equi- 
vocal. On opening the pericardium half an hour 
after the sternum had been removed, the motions of 
the heart became very visible; they continued more 
than an hour after the first exposure of the contents 
of the thorax. 

The universally diffused florid colour in A was par- 
ticularly striking; So was the dulness of one heart at 
first, and the vivacity of the other: Of the latter, I 
believe the spontaneous pulsations were in all many 
|P_16
times more frequent and forcible; though this circum- 
stance deserves more particular examination than we 
bestowed upon it. The kitten (A) had eaten some 
time after being put into the reservoir, as appeared 
from food introduced at the same time. The air seemed 
to have suffered little diminution either in quantity or 
quality: The reason will appear from a subsequent 
experiment. On cutting the wind-pipe of A to blow 
up the lungs, a good deal of viscid mucus flowed out. 
This was occasioned by strong action continued for 
some time, and was not seen in any thing like the same 
degree in B. 

[}V.—Experiments to ascertain the condition of the ve- 
nous blood in animals made to respire oxygene air. }]
On comparing the experiments made upon blood 
out of the body, I was formerly uncertain what might 
be expected to be the effect of hyper-oxygenation of 
the system upon the colour and other qualities of 
the venous blood. (See my Observations on consump- 
tion.) Many substances, containing oxygene, brighten 
venous blood, but oxygenated marine acid, according 
to several foreign chemists of reputation, has an oppo- 
site effect. Mr. Guillemarde and myself often noticed 
the dark appearance of the veins in animals charged 
with oxygene, and of the blood they discharged when 
wounded. To investigate this point more particularly, 
one of two equal half-grown rabbits was kept fifteen 
minutes in a mixture of three parts of oxygene air 
from heated manganese, and one parts of atmospheric 
air. Both were killed by blows on the back of the 
head, and opened nearly at the same time. This ex- 
|P_17
periment was made in the presence of Mr. William 
Clayfield, and Mr. Bowles, Surgeon, or Bristol. In 
the oxygenated rabbit neither the vena cava itself, nor 
blood taken from it, appeared less dark-coloured; we 
thought (but were not certain) that it was rather more 
so. The blood of the oxygenated rabbit coagulated 
much more rapidly. The liver also was of a much 
less dark colour in this rabbit. 

The blood of both gained its usual florid colour on 
standing exposed to the air. 

Experiment 2.—Of two equal and nearly full- 
grown rabbits, one was kept a quarter of an hour in 
undiluted oxygene air, prepared as before. Both were 
then killed and opened, as before, by Mr. Bowles. 
In the oxygenated the following were the appearances. 
The veins were certainly not of a lighter colour, nor 
the blood. A quantity from the vena cava of both rab- 
bits was received in tea-cups. When it was spread 
thin on the sides of the vessel, we thought the oxyge- 
nated blood had a purple or claret colour, which was 
not perceptible in the other; Mr. Bowles likewise 
thought its general appearance rather darker; its coa- 
gulation, as in the former experiment, was more speedy: 
and the coagulum, as I thought on examination af- 
terwards, was firmer.—The liver was less dark. 

On the margin of the lungs in the oxygenated rabbit, 
we observed florid spots in shape and situation like 
those I had formerly seen on the lungs of animals long 
confined in oxygene air; and which I take to be points 
of inflammation. 

We observed signs of much stronger irritability in 
the right auricle and ventricle, in the diaphragm and 
|P_18
the intercostal muscles of the oxygenated rabbit. They 
continued longer too in this. But considering the 
force and frequency of the contractions, the quantity 
of action would have been greater in the oxygenated, 
had the irritability continued five times as long in the 
other. 

These phænomena made me wish for an opportu- 
nity of oxygenating animals of large size, as horses, 
and of drawing blood from their veins and arteries 
both before and afterwards. Such a train of experi- 
ments would form a very interesting supplement to Mr. 
Hunter's researches concerning the general principles 
of the blood. (See his Treatise on the blood, inflamma- 
tion, and gun-shot wounds, p. 11-100.) The spee- 
dier coagulation of the oxygenated venous blood I 
think remarkable, and as it happened in three experi- 
ments, it probably was not accidental. The more vi- 
gorous action of the oxygenated muscles too deserves 
to be compared by a course of experiments with the 
tendency of oxygenated blood to coagulate sooner. 
Several persons, of whom all did not know the one 
rabbit from the other, found the boiled flesh of the oxy- 
genated, in both cases, more stringy, harder, and less 
juicy. The difference was most sensible in the young 
pair. The greater stringiness was apparent on both 
these occasions to the eye. 

We observed that the rabbits drank repeatedly du- 
ring their confinement in oxygene air. The latter had 
been watered a short time before; I could not learn 
whether the former had or not. Perhaps this thirst 
(if such it was) depends on the excitement produced. 

|P_19
The conclusion directly deducible from these expe- 
riments, is, that the blood parts with that excess of 
oxygene upon which its florid colour depends, before 
it gets into the larger veins, or indeed into any of the 
visible veins. The altered colour of the solids shews 
where the oxygene remains. But as we can never get 
to the end of our physiological enquiries, a further 
problem may be proposed:— If the oxygenation be 
continued very long, will not the solids be so 
highly charged as to be able to take no more oxy- 
gene from the arterial blood? and will it not pass 
florid into the veins? —If this does not happen, 
there must be some contrivance in the system to throw 
this principle perpetually from the solids. Those who 
do not think that oxygene combines with the blood 
during respiration, have only to change the terms of 
my conclusion. The fact remains. 

[}VI.—Experiments with air, containing somewhat more 
oxygene than the atmosphere. }]
In my letter to Dr. Darwin, I conjectured that if 
before immersion divers were to breathe air of an 
higher than the ordinary standard, they would be able 
to continue longer under water,  (p. 13). I made se- 
veral experiments to determine whether this supposi- 
tion was just; in each two animals of the same litter 
were employed; and as several spectators were some- 
times present, they were desired to fix upon the weakest 
for oxygenation. The following report I literally 
transcribe from my journal, as it was settled and sub- 
scribed by the spectators: August 20th, 1793. 
Kitten C was placed in a mixture of nearly two- 
thirds oxygene air from manganese, and one-third 
|P_20
atmospheric air; it was kept twenty minutes in the 
vessel, which was from time to time supplied with 
oxygene air, so as to keep the air better than atmo- 
spheric air; which was known by dipping a candle 
into it, and observing that it burned with a brighter 
flame. At the expiration of the twenty minutes, C 
and D, which had breathed atmospheric air, 
were immersed in water till perfect asphyxia came 
on. At the instant they were taken out, there ap- 
peared in both a motion of the lower jaw; C began 
sensibly to recover, while D lay as dead: In a mi- 
nute and half, C rose, and began to walk about the 
room, staggering at first, D being sill motionless or 
nearly so; in this state it continued for fifteen mi- 
nutes, when, for the first time, it raised itself, and 
immediately afterwards fell on its side. 

Christopher Machell. 
Richard Lovell Edgeworth. 
J. Guillemard. 
Jas. Sadler. 
Thomas Beddoes. 

"Kitten D died the next day. "

Of many similar experiments, it is sufficient to ob- 
serve, that the result was always in some degree the 
same; sometimes the unoxygenated animal failed to 
recover; it was generally noticed that the oxygenated 
shewed signs of life under water the longest; and some- 
times that it struggled as much as ever after its unoxy- 
genated fellow had ceased to move. Thus, in an ex- 
periment (September 28) a whelp, which had respired 
atmospheric mixed with one-third of oxygene air for 
thirty-four minutes, is registered to have been as much 
alive as before immersion under water, another puppy 
|P_21
of the same litter unprepared, and immersed at the 
same time, having become motionless. These facts 
illustrate the query concerning divers. To obviate 
any mistake from difference of constitution, the expe- 
riment was sometimes repeated upon the same pair of 
animals, one being oxygenated one day, and the other 
the next, or the day following. The water in which 
they were drowned, was sometimes heated to the tem- 
perature of the body. 

But as unequal quantities of liquid have been found 
to get down the wind-pipe of drowning animals, it 
seemed proper to repeat the experiment in another 
manner.—Accordingly, of two greyhound puppies of 
the same litter, ten days old, E the weaker was kept an 
hour and fifty minutes in a mixture of two-thirds of 
atmospheric air, and one-third of oxygene air from 
heated manganese. F was left as usual: Both were 
then immersed in hydrogene air. F soon appeared 
much agitated, and expressed much uneasiness. E 
moved very little, and soon placed itself in the couch- 
ant posture, with the head between the fore-legs and 
the muzzle resting on the bottom of the vessel. In 
five minutes, F was lying on its side, now and then 
breathing, which it did less and less frequently and 
more feebly. In ten minutes, this effort was scarce 
perceptible: In two minutes more, it was not once 
repeated. For the last six out of the twelve minutes, 
E was so perfectly still, that we were disposed to be- 
lieve it dead; and a person present said, this expe- 
riment will turn out ill for oxygene.  During these 
last six minutes, E had not inspired at all; and from 
the first, the respiration was very infrequent. 

|P_22
At the end of the twelve minutes, both puppies 
were taken out of the hydrogene air; E immediately 
cried and struggled, F being quite motionless. They 
were laid before a fire; E cried, moved, and soon 
walked as usual; F seeming quite dead. In sixteen 
minutes, a stream of oxygene air was blown into F's 
mouth, but no sign of life appeared. The animal was 
afterwards opened; upon irritating the pericardium 
with a pointed knife, so as to press upon the heart, no 
movement followed; the pericardium being removed, 
the heart began to contract spontaneously; a stream 
of oxygene air being directed upon the heart, its ac- 
tion became more strong and frequent; the number 
of strokes was about seventy in a minute. The colour 
of the heart (probably from the filling of its own blood 
vessels) changed from pale to red. The difference of 
colour in the tongues of these puppies was striking, 
after the experiment, even by candle light, that of E 
being much more ruddy. The following variation 
seems worth transcribing from the journal: Of two 
puppies of the same litter, the weaker G was kept in 
atmospheric air mixed with one-third oxygene, and H 
for an equal time in atmospheric air with one-third 
hydrogene. Both were plunged into tepid water. 
H became motionless, while G moved with force, 
cried on being taken out, and seemed little affected. 

The effect of oxygene air was very striking in re- 
covering H. It began to move, and respire the 
moment it was put into a vessel containing this air. 

It was sometimes observed, that the movements of 
very young puppies under water, did not entirely 
cease in less than fifteen minutes. 

|P_23
[}VII.—Necessity of oxygene air to muscular exertion. }]
The blood in the veins is dark; in the arteries it is 
bright. When the respiration is straitened, the ar- 
terial blood becomes darker; when access of oxygene 
air is prevented, all the blood becomes dark. In 
drowned and strangled persons, the face, lips, the skin 
under the nails, and some other parts, are of a violet or 
dark blue colour. Here the blood can receive no 
oxygene.—There are a number of cases on record, 
where, from bad conformation of the heart and adja- 
cent great blood vessels, part of the blood only tra- 
versed the lungs; the rest passed into the arteries 
again in the dark disoxygenated state in which it re- 
turns from the veins. Such persons are always blue 
or livid. They are extremely feeble; in walking, are 
sometimes obliged to stop every third step, nor can 
they make any exertion of the muscles without instant 
panting and weariness. They commonly die suddenly; 
you will find an account of such individuals in the 
Commentaries of the Institution at Bologna Vol. 6, 
p. 64.Philosoph. Transactions, vol. 55, p. 72. Me- 
dical Observations and Enquiries, vol. 6, in my Medical 
Observ. p. 62.Abernethy's Surgical Essays, part 2.— 
Persons ill of sea-scurvy, often drop down dead in 
making a sudden effort, and from surprize. There is 
reason to believe, that either living in confined air, or 
on salted food, occasions a deficiency of oxygene in 
the fluids and solids. 

Hence, if a person were to keep quite still, a given 
quantity of air should serve him to breath longer than 
if he exerted himself. Thus should any persons find 
themselves again in the situation of Mr. Holwell and 
|P_24
his fellow-sufferers in the Black-hole prison at Cal- 
cutta, their best chance of surviving would probably 
be to forbear vehement struggles. The fever of the 
survivors appears to have been occasioned by the great 
stimulating power of fresh air, and of the sensations 
their escape must have occasioned. 

The following experiments render probable the ex- 
penditure of oxygene in muscular exertion. They 
do not, however, absolutely prove this position; nor 
did their immediate result appear to me so certain as of 
my other experiments. Of two half-grown kittens of 
the same litter, one was teazed to make efforts for half 
an hour, and then put into an air-tight vessel, in which 
it lived 48 minutes; the other lived 56 m. in the same 
vessel; it would require more such cruel experiments 
to decide whether speedier death here arose from pre- 
vious consumption of oxygene by strong muscular 
action, and the subsequent necessity of a supply. It 
should be observed, that the first animal was not respir- 
ing more deeply than the second, at the time they 
were inclosed. 

The following fact is remarkable, and countenances, 
but does not rigorously prove, the hypothesis. A 
grown cat was inclosed in an air-tight glass vessel. 
She immediately became furious to a degree beyond 
what I ever observed in any animal under experiment. 
The violent agitation continued for 20 minutes. In 
5 minutes more—25 minutes in all—she appeared 
dead; she was left in the vessel two minutes longer, 
and proved to be quite dead. A lighted candle was 
immediately extinguished on being introduced into the 
vessel. 

|P_25
Into the same vessel another cat of the same size 
and age nearly, to which a small glass of white wine 
had been given half an hour before, was introduced. 
This cat sat almost perfectly still during the whole 
experiment. It lived 47 minutes, or nearly twice as 
long as the other. 

In order to vary the experiment, half a glass of 
sherry was given to a kitten nearly grown. It was 
immediately put into the same receiver; and set to 
struggle very violently. It soon appeared to respire 
with difficulty. In 15 minutes the respirations were 
98 or 100 in a minute. It did not respire after the 
34th minute, and in 2 minutes more was taken out in- 
sensible. 

A fellow kitten, no way prepared, was placed in the 
same receiver, and remained very tranquil for above a 
quarter of an hour; its respiration was never so fre- 
quent as that of the former; and it raised its head and 
breathed at the end of 41 minutes. 

We have then 
Minutes. Minutes. An harassed kitten living 48}Difference 8. Its fellow, not previously harassed, 56A grown cat not prepared, but furi- 
ously agitated, - - - }
25
Difference 22. Another perfectly tranquil, having 
drank wine, - - - 
47A large kitten immediately after 
wine, and violent, - - }
34
Difference 7. Its fellow tranquil without wine, 41

In these six experiments the same vessel, that is, the 
same quantity of air, was used. It may be said, by a 
|P_26
person unused to accuracy of terms, "no wonder the 
most exhausted animals should perish soonest. " By 
considering a moment, he will perceive, that it is de- 
sirable to know precisely in what this exhaustion 
consists. I formerly conjectured that oxygene is con- 
sumed faster by an animal under the first operation of 
wine or other such stimulants; and Dr. Withering 
afterwards adduced the experience of Mr. Spalding in 
confirmation of this conjecture. It is not so easy to 
make the experiment upon animals; the efforts of some 
under confinement being so much more violent than 
of others. The last experiment was made with a view 
to this question, but the two preceding incline me to 
refer speedier death in this instance to the violent 
struggles, rather than to the wine. 

[}VIII.—Another comparative experiment with an Ani- 
mal charged with oxygene. }]
Of two half-grown rabbits (K and L) of the same 
brood, colour, size, and apparent strength, K was put 
into a larger reservoir containing atmospheric air with 
a little oxygene. After some hours it was taken out, 
and placed for an hour longer in a mixture of nearly 
equal parts of oxygene and atmospheric air. It did 
not seem to suffer in its respiration; K and L, which 
latter had remained at large in the same apartment, 
were then inclosed in a vessel, and placed in a freezing 
mixture. In 20 minutes some of the cold brine was 
poured upon the bottom of the vessel in which the 
rabbits were: in 30 minutes L seemed affected, in 45 
was scarce alive, and in 55 was quite lifeless, and fro- 
zen stiff. They were dipped in cold water, and the 
animal recovered perfectly. I observed many con- 
vulsions and much tremor of the limbs during reco- 
|P_27
very. It was between 8 and 9 o'clock in the evening 
when the rabbits were taken out of the vessel. K, by 
12, had recovered the use of its forelegs, and being left 
not far from a dying fire within the fender, was found 
in the morning running about the room, when it eat 
cabbage leaves freely. It was kept alive for a week, 
when the legs appeared diseased from too quick ap- 
plication of heat at first. 

The experiment being repeated without admitting 
liquor into the receiver, the result was similar. Would 
opium and wine enable an animal to resist the freez- 
ing mixture, as oxygene does? 

[}IX.—Experiments with oxygene and other airs, largely 
distributed through the cellular substance. }]
Dr. Maxwell, assisted by Dr. Goodwyn and some 
other friends of accuracy and genius, forced different 
airs under the skin of animals, whence every person in 
any degree acquainted with anatomy, knows they 
would insinuate themselves far and wide through the 
body, in consequence of the free communication be- 
tween different portions of the cellular substance.— 
I. 41/2 pints of atmospherical air were forced under the 
skin of a bitch, weighing 20lb. the incision was 
closed by a suture: the animal appeared uneasy and 
indisposed for 36 hours; the puffing did not begin to 
subside before the 9th day; on the 20th, no air was 
left except a little about the lower part of the belly.— 
II. 3 pints of air, in which a light had burned out, 
were forced under the skin of a dog weighing 13lb. 
For some hours the animal appeared stupid. The em- 
physema or puffing seemed to decrease during the 3d 
|P_28
day; on the 16th convulsions came on and frequently 
returned; on the 20th the dog died, much debilitated. 
In three other experiments nearly the same phæno- 
mena were observed.— III. 4 pints of oxygene air 
were infused in the same manner into another dog; 
slight uneasiness was observed for the first hour, and 
afterwards the animal appeared exceedingly lively 
(maxima alacritas). Next day the emphysema began 
to lessen; by the 10th all the air was absorbed. In 
another dog of 19lb. 31/2 pints of this air disappeared in 
8 days; in a third of 21lb. 3 pints in 8 days; in a 4th 
of 20lb. 3 pints nearly in 7 days. The 2d and 3d were 
affected as the first dog; the 4th was in no way affected. 
— IV. Carbonic acid air was infused into several 
dogs and rabbits. A large quantity (as much as 2 
pints in a dog of 17lb.) disappearing during the opera- 
tion; the rest was gradually absorbed in 4-14 days. 
No inconvenience followed, except in one case where 
a pint of air infused into a rabbit 3 months old, occa- 
sioned uneasiness from distention; but even here the 
animal eat with a good appetite in half an hour. The 
instantaneous disappearance of so much air in these 
experiments, was probably owing to its combination 
with the moisture in the cellular substance.— Inflam- 
mable air (from metallic solutions, I suppose) occa- 
sioned heaviness and shivering in two dogs; 3 pints in 
one 21/2 in the other. Some detumescence was ob- 
served on the 4th day in both; in 13 days the air was 
all gone in the 1st, and in the 2d in 9 days.— VI. 21/2
pints of nitrous air were infused into a dog of 28lb. 
It howled as if in exquisite pain: in 15 minutes it stag- 
gered as if drunk; then convulsions came on, and vo- 
miting with involuntary excretions. In 30 minutes 
it lay enfeebled on the ground, making deep and labo- 
|P_29
rious inspirations, in 541/2 it died, the convulsions con- 
tinuing to the last.—The heart had all its cavities full, 
and was quite inirritable. The lungs were of a pale 
saffron colour, and shewed no vestige of red blood. 
Brain in a natural state. In another experiment 11/2
pint of nitrous air produced the same effects, and death 
in 45 minutes. In neither case were the external 
muscles inirritable. Rabbits died just as these dogs, 
and the smell of nitrous acid was perceived when the 
lungs were inflated and left to collapse. In this thesis 
(Edinburgh 1787) Dr. Maxwell relates other experi- 
ments, in which airs were thrown into the blood-ves- 
sels. By one (p. 22) he shews that elastic fluids do 
not prove fatal till they get into the cavities of the 
heart. But as these latter experiments suggest no 
conclusion concerning the medicinal power of elastic 
fluids, I need not consider them at present. Mr. 
Achard of Berlin, was the first who published experi- 
ments with different aird injected into the cellular 
membrane. But Mr. Achard is a writer whom you 
can seldom quote with confidence. 

[}X.—Experiments with hydrogene and other mephi- 
tic airs. }]
Dr. Priesley, (Exp. on Air, N. Ed. I. 229), says, 
Inflammable air kills animals as suddenly as fixed 
air, and as far as can be perceived, in the same 
manner, throwing them into convulsions, and there- 
by occasioning present death.  Dr. Priestley does 
not say how he ascertained the former part of this as- 
sertion, and I apprehend, it will be found erroneous, 
if it regard pure hydrogene. Mr. Scheele could make 
20 inspirations without inconvenience; and I have 
seen several persons breathe still oftener from a tube 
|P_30
through which a current of this air set, their nostrils 
not being closed (Letter to Dr. Darwin, p. 44). Hence 
I concluded that this bland air might with impunity 
be breathed unmixed, longer than any other mephitic 
air, except perhaps azotic. Dr. Macdonald of Belfast, 
whose abilities and skill in physiological researches 
must be well remembered by all who studied medicine 
at Edinburgh ten years ago, confirms me in this opinion. 
I have tried , (he informs me in a letter dated August 
13, 1794),  hydrogen air in five pulmonary cases, in 
two of which it had a very sudden and a very fa- 
vourable influence. In one of the others the 
measles supervened upon phthisis, and seemed to 
decrease the first disease.—My patients sometimes 
respired hydrogen air for a minute and half at a 
time; the more frequently they repeated the expe- 
riment, the more easy did it become; but after 15 or 
20 inspirations I always observed the face to grow 
dark and livid. I am astonished at the length of 
time which man can breathe, and animals live in, 
hydrogen air. 

Dr. Gilby of Birmingham noted the following ap- 
pearances, and immediately afterwards drew out this 
minute. 

[}"Hydrogene Air. "}]
A mouse immersed in hydrogene air—from wa- 
ter and heated malleable iron—continued 30 seconds 
without shewing any mark of distress; respiration 
then became laborious; one minute 33 seconds 
from the time of immersion it inspired; but it 
moved no more, and when taken out, proved to be 
quite dead. 

|P_31
[}"Fixed, or Carbonic acid Air. "}]
Another mouse, immersed in this air, was instantly 
affected; and in 15 seconds was completely dead. 
A young wood pigeon, in hydrogene air, ceased to 
gape and move in 2 minutes 35 seconds. For 10 or 
15 seconds it did not appear incommoded. Its fellow, 
in carbonic acid air, ceased to gape and move in 43 
seconds. It shewed distress instantly on immersion. 

Very young animals do not drown so soon as old.— 
Imagining, therefore, that young animals would afford 
a more sensible scale on which to measure the power 
of different mephitic airs to extinguish life, I made the 
following experiment. A puppy, four days old, was 
put into a vessel of hydrogene air from heated iron 
and water. It ceased to breathe and move twenty-two 
minutes afterwards.—Another puppy, of the same lit- 
ter, was put into carbonic acid gas: it ceased to breathe 
and move in one minute and an half.—Comparative 
experiments of this kind require repetition; two ap- 
parently similar animals may be tenacious of life in 
different degrees, from causes not yet discovered; 
moreover, if immediately before immersion, one should 
have inspired, and the other expired, this might oc- 
casion a wrong inference: nor should dependence be 
placed on a slight difference. By keeping animals, 
seemingly equal, in different unrespirable airs, till all 
appearances of life in one or the other had ceased; 
then taking the survivor out, suffering it to recover, 
and after some days drowning it again in that air in 
which its fellow had perished before, I hoped to de- 
termine this question certainly for the subjects of expe- 
riment, and by analogy for all animals of the same class. 

|P_32
Accordingly, three rabbits of the same litter, seven 
weeks old, nearly half grown, and weighing one pound 
and an half each, were successively immersed in three 
different kinds of air. Dr. Gilby being present at this 
experiment also, noted the appearances at the moment 
they occurred. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Experiment I.—Rabbit X. 
In hydrogene from water and heated malleable iron. }]Minutes, Seconds, after immersion. In 120Moved about, in appear- 
ance little distressed. 150Began to breathe short. 20Visibly distressed. 415Much agitated. 70Taken out, breathing very 
short and thick. In less than 170Completely recovered. In 400(that is, as soon as food 
was offered) began to 
eat. [^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Experiment II.—Rabbit P. 
In hydrocarbonate air from hot charcoal and water, 
twice passed through water. }]Minutes. Seconds. In 025Breathed short, distessed. 035Violently agitated, conti- 
nued so 15 seconds; in- 
spired at long intervals 
for some seconds: scarce 
alive. 
|P_33Minutes. Seconds. After 130No inspiration or move- 
ment seen. In 40Taken out for dead—did 
not recover. [^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Experiment III.—Rabbit Q. 
"In carbonic acid air, from heated chalk."}]Minutes, Seconds, after immersion. 020Strongly convulsed. 035Gasped at intervals. 049Has continued gasping. 10Nearly dead. 115Quite dead. 20Taken out, perfectly ina- 
nimate, did not recover. [^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Experiment IV.—Rabbit R. }]
At the time of making these experiments I had not 
pure azotic air at command, and had neglected to use 
it when I had; the following observation makes it 
highly probable, that this air is not more suddenly 
deleterious than hydrogene. A candle having burned 
out in a vessel full of atmospheric air in contact with 
lime water, a very small kitten (about 14 days old) 
was put into the same portion of air; after the death 
of this kitten, which did not happen in less than 3 
|P_34
hours, the fellow of the three preceding rabbits was 
introduced; the following were the appearances: 
Minutes. 1Breath short—turns round. 3In no great distress, breath short. 5The same. 7Breath shorter. 10Respiration apparently more laborious. 12Taken out—very soon recovered—a can- 
dle plunged into the vessel was immediately extin- 
guished. [^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Experiment V.—Rabbit X again, 
at the interval of several days in hydrogene air. }]Min. Sec. ——At first very tranquil. 20Snuffs for air round the side 
of the vessel. 40Reclined almost on its side. 530Breathes thick—very weak. 610Taken out, breathing thick. 710Could sit. 80Could move, tho' still weak. 930As usual. [^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Experiment VI.—Rabbit X a third time. 
At the interval of two days—recent hydrocarbonate, pre- 
pared without superfluous steam. }]——Distressed the moment of 
immersion. 
|P_35Min. Sec. 020Scratched the vessel furi- 
ously. 025Fell on its side. 035Motionless and insensible— 
taken out. ——Lay as dead some time; 
finally recovered. 
Another rabbit of the same brood, (before immersion 
in water, visibly much affected with fear) struggled 
with strength for a minute and an half. At the end 
of two minutes, forty seconds, it moved; in three mi- 
nutes was taken out, but did not recover. 

Should these experiments be repeated by a person, 
careful to procure his elastic fluids free from offensive 
acid fumes, the distinctness of the phænomena I ob- 
served, persuades me that their general result will be 
confirmed. Of some readers, whom the importance 
of the subject may lead to take up this pamphlet, the 
curiosity will, I fear, be repressed be sensations, ari- 
sing from the idea of pain endured by the animals. In 
a few cases, the torture which was inflicted was ex- 
ceedingly repugnant to my own feelings; and for this 
reason, I have left one series of experiments (Sect. vii.) 
more incompleat than I could easily have rendered it. 
Against drowning, an imputation of cruelty will hardly 
lie: Animals, destined to this death, may just as well 
drown for the instruction of the physician. Besides, 
did not accustomed acts of outrage and injustice daily 
pass uncensured, I know not how he who feeds upon 
the flesh of a slaughtered animal can consistently con- 
|P_36
demn investigations, seriously tending to restore or pre- 
serve health, though conducted at the expence of the 
life and ease os animals, unable to resist the power of 
man. I wish, with all my heart, I could prove that 
morose writer in the wrong, who has called the Earth 
a vast field of battle, where creature, for 
preservation, preys upon creature, or tortures its fellow 
in pursuit of pleasure. 

Two kittens immersed, one in carbonic acid, the 
other in hydrogene air, afforded a similar result; that 
is, the carbonic acid appeared full three times as dele- 
terious as hydrogene. 

Finally, to render the difference again more distinct, 
two equal quantities of atmospheric, were successively 
mixed with an equal bulk of carbonic acid, and of hy- 
drogene, air. A rabbit (S) being put into the mixture 
of atmospheric and carbonic acid air; the following 
observations were made. 
Minutes. In 2Appeared weak. 4Has been couchant for 2 minutes. 6Very still. 11Respiration more laborious. 26Extremely weak; seems ready to fall 
on one side; scarce alive. 43Quite dead.—After the 2d minute it ne- 
ver rose—death very lingering. 
A fellow rabbit, T, in atmospheric and hydrogene 
air, seemed much less distressed at first; rubbed its 
fore-feet after it had continued in the vessel 40 mi- 
|P_37
nutes, and performed several other actions; much of 
the time it sat, that is, it continued erect before. 
Even at the last, no distress, except quick respiration, 
was observable. 

In 48 minutes it was taken out; it now stood firm; 
and though unwilling to move; was capable, when 
urged forward, of advancing, without staggering, or 
any sign of great debility. In appearance it had suf- 
fered less in 48 than its fellow in 15 minutes. 

[}XI.—How hydrocarbonate air affects venous blood. }]
Two fowls were strangled and a rabbit was drowned 
while their fellows were immersed in hydrocarbonate 
air. In all these last the veins appeared of a brightish 
red colour! the liver and heart (which was perfectly 
irritable) were also of a bright colour. In the others 
the liver was dark as usual; and the heart pale. In the 
hydrocarbonated rabbit the flesh was universally of a 
light lively red. The blood from the vena cava had 
the same brightness; it coagulated about as soon as the 
livid blood of the strangled fowls and drowned rabbit. 
The boiled flesh of all the fowls had much the same 
taste and toughness. The muscles of the lower extre- 
mities of the hydrocarbonated fowls were of a lively 
red. The boiled flesh of the h. rabbit had a pink hue.— 
Of two equal fowls one was put into hydrocarbonate 
and one into carbonic acid air; the former was ruddy 
throughout, as was well seen in the heart cut across. 
In the fowl put into c. acid air nothing of this bright 
red colour appeared. The liver I though paler than in 
strangled fowls: but I had not one at hand for imme- 
diate comparison. Of this last h. fowl the wings and 
breast were brown, and the thighs reddish. 

|P_38
[}XII.—Reflections on the preceding facts. }]
The attentive reader must have seen, even in the result 
of these simple extemporaneous experiments, indubita- 
ble proofs of the power of factitious airs variously to af- 
fect the living frame. It appears that oxygene air, when 
inspired pure, or nearly so, increases the motions so as 
to produce dangerous or mortal inflammation; that 
by reddening the blood, it brightens the colour of the 
solid parts; even that of the liver, which anatomy 
shews to be the least likely of all the solids to be affec- 
ted by any change of the arterial blood: that it renders 
animals less capable of being drowned or destroyed by 
cold; that it is expended in muscular motion, since 
animals that have exerted themselves violently, imme- 
diately before confinement in a given quantity of at- 
mospheric air, or during confinement, soonest exhaust 
it of oxygene; and that, when it is blown into dogs, in 
the manner veal is blown up by butchers, it produces a 
remarkable degree of vivacity. These facts, compa- 
red with some of the observations, which will be given 
in the next paragraph, will prove of use in directing 
us how to apply this air properly as a remedy; espe- 
cially as they will appear to have been confirmed since 
their first publication by observations on the sick. 

Between unrespirable airs, there seems a remarkable 
difference in their power to produce insensibility and 
death. Hydrogene appears the least noxious, both 
when inspired alone, or mixed with atmospheric air. 
Azote probably differs little from hydrogene. Hydro- 
carbonate seems extremely deleterious; Mr. Watt 
gives evidence of this in the human species. I 
can add a similar observation. A person in con- 
|P_39
firmed consumption breathed a quantity of hydrocar- 
bonate, mixed with 4 times its bulk of atmospheric air: 
he became very sick, or rather vertiginous; the pulse 
was much quickened, and the extremities became very 
cold. The patient finding an abatement of pain in his 
side, and of dyspnoea, returned for another dose. The 
operator, a chemist of great skill, thinking the former 
dose too strong, mixed 50 c. inches of hydrocarbonate 
with 600 of atmospheric air. This was respired with- 
out any sensible effect. In a quarter of an hour, 100 
c. i. of hydrocarbonate were mixed with 600 of atmo- 
spheric air. The patient breathed at twice about two- 
thirds of this mixture, when he was desired to desist. 
Soon afterwards he became vertiginous and nearly 
insensible, his pulse at one period being nearly imper- 
ceptible; the sphincter of the bladder was relaxed; 
after his recovery, he was again very cold— "intensely 
cold to his own feelings " was his expression—as well 
as to the touch. After getting into his carriage, he 
fainted; and his pulse for several hours continued 
quicker and weaker than before. The operator hav- 
ing observed, that when much water is added to red- 
hot charcoal, carbonic acid air is copiously produced, 
in the preparation of this last portion of air, had added 
so little water, that no superfluous steam at all came 
over; hence it was as pure as can be made: being 
also newly prepared, it retained all the charcoal it had 
carried up; of which it is well known to deposit part 
on standing. This might lead to conjecture, that the 
greater deleterious power of heavy inflammable air 
from water and hot charcoal (hydrocarbonate) com- 
pared with that of light inflammable air, depends on 
|P_40
the facility of its combination, or at least of the char- 
coal it contains with the oxygene of the blood; in con- 
sequence of which, it speedily disarms the system of its 
moving principle. This opinion seems countenanced 
by the effect of nitrous air, which more quickly de- 
stroys life than any of those above-mentioned, and 
which is well-known very readily to combine with 
oxygene. Death, in this case, might be more instanta- 
neous, from the instantaneous production of an highly 
corrosive acid (nitrous acid) and its application to the 
whole surface of the lungs. But for the rapid effect 
of carbonic acid air, and the appearances in XI I can 
assign no plausible reason, nor does the above hypo- 
thesis suit the facts in XI, which with those in X refute 
those eminent philosophers, who have of late supposed 
that water and several bland unrespirable airs occasion 
death, simply by exclusion of the oxygene of the atmo- 
sphere. Their action is certainly unequal; and I presume, 
recovery from asphyxia in water (when but little goes 
down the wind-pipe), hydrogene air, azote, or from 
strangulation (where no material organic injury is pro- 
duced), will be much more easy than from asphyxia, 
occasioned by other unrespirable mediums. 

Experiments to discover the effects of the long con- 
tinued action of aeri-form substances, would be much 
more curious than such as I have made. They would 
thus, in all probability, more deeply and permanently 
affect the living system. If, for instance, an animal 
were kept in an atmosphere containing 20/10024/100 of oxy- 
gene or still less, it would perhaps be affected by the 
sea-scurvy. The muscular fibres, at least, and the solids 
in general would in all probability be found weak, 
|P_41
tender, or easy to be torn. Again, if three equal grow- 
ing animals were kept, one in the atmosphere, the 
other in air of an higher, the third of a lower, standard, 
and in all other respects treated alike; some consider- 
able difference would perhaps be observed in their 
growth and vigour.—By frequent immersion in water, 
the association between the movements of the heart 
and lungs might perhaps be dissolved; and an 
animal be inured to live commodiously for any time 
under water. If some plan, similar to that which I have 
ventured to propose, should be executed, such pro- 
cesses of investigation ought to be carried on in the 
Institution. 

[}XIII.—Some effects of the inspiration of hydrogene, to elu- 
cidate the result of the foregoing experiments. }]
When an animal is immersed in water, his pulse be- 
comes weak and fequent, he feels an anxiety about his 
breast, and struggles to relieve it: in these struggles, 
he rises towards the surface of the water, and throws 
out a quantity of air from his lungs. After this, 
his anxiety increases, his pulse becomes weaker; the 
struggles are renewed with more violence; he rises 
towards the surface again; throws out more air from 
his lungs, and makes several efforts to inspire; and 
in some of these efforts, a quantity of water com- 
monly passes into his mouth; his skin then becomes 
blue, particularly about the face and lips; his pulse 
gradually ceases; the sphincters are relaxed; he falls 
down without sensation, and without motion. (Dr. 
Goodwyn, l. c. pp 33, 4.) This description of drowning 
in water applies, as far as the circumstances admit of 
comparison, to the effects occasioned by the respiration 
of pure hydrogene. I have remarked them in a num- 
|P_42
ber of healthy persons, who were curious to try how 
long they could breathe this air. The frequency and 
debility of pulse, blueness of the lips and coloured parts 
of the skin, were always observable in a minute, or a 
minute and an half. Besides, dizziness was felt, and 
the eyes have grown dim; in animals, the transparent 
cornea has appeared sunk and shrivelled. Several in- 
dividuals agree in describing the incipient insensibility 
as highly agreeable. One consumptive person loved 
to indulge in it; for this purpose, contrary to my judg- 
ment, he used to inspire a cubic foot of hydrogene at 
a time. This quantity most commonly produced little 
change in his feelings. Sometimes it brought on al- 
most compleat asphyxia. During this process, I have 
felt the pulse nearly obliterated. Afterwards, as he 
recovered, it was sensibly fuller, and stronger than be- 
fore the inspiration. This fact belongs to a general 
principle now beginning to be understood; when the 
ordinary powers have been, for a certain time, with- 
held from the body, they act with greater effect, as 
holding the fingers to the fire after handling snow, 
occasions severe aching. For this reason, whenever 
air with less oxygene is to be inspired, it would seem 
more advantageous to employ for a long time an at- 
mosphere little reduced, than one so low that it can 
only be breathed for a short time. 

An observation the patient just mentioned made 
upon himself, seems to shew the necessity of oxygene 
to muscular action. Judging from his feelings, that 
he was perfectly recruited after his dose of pure hy- 
drogene, he has risen from his sopha with an intention 
to walk about his apartment, but has been surprised on 
rising, to find himself incapable of advancing three 
|P_43
steps, till he had rested some time longer. In this case, 
was not the store of loosely combined oxygene, laid in 
before, expended during the inspiration of the hydro- 
gene, by those motions which are perpetually going 
on in the system? Did it not require some time to re- 
place the necessary portion in the muscles remote 
from the heart and lungs? 

[}XIV.—Some particulars relative to oxygene, supplemen- 
tal to the preceding experiments. }]
The celebrated Dr. Ingenhousz in a letter dated 
August 4th, 1791, mentions to me a very curious ex- 
periment, "which, " says he, if it be a real fact, 
throws a great deal of light upon your system; it is 
this:—Blister your finger, so as to lay bare the na- 
ked and sensible skin. The contact of air will pro- 
duce pain: put your finger into vital air, and this 
will give more pain; introduce it into fixed or azo- 
tic air, and the pain will diminish or cease.  Dr. 
Webster, he adds, was informed of these circumstan- 
ces, by a Frenchman, whose name does not appear; 
I had often heard them indistinctly related; and it is 
rather surprising that the fact has not been ascertained. 
Much of the art of modern surgery consists in keeping 
the air from wounds and some kinds of ulcers: and 
this fact, if the account be true, pretty decisively shews 
which ingredient of the atmosphere is injurious. 

I applied a blister an inch long, and half an inch 
broad, to the back of the third finger of the left hand. 
When the pain from the action of the cantharides had 
entirely ceased, I cut away the scarf-skin of the vesica- 
tion; and was sensible, the moment the air was admit- 
ted, of a sharp smarting pain. This did not continue 
|P_44
so severe; but the exposed true skin sensibly smarted. 
Upon tying the neck of a bladder, containing carbonic 
acid air from heated chalk, round the root of the fin- 
ger, the pain very soon subsided. While I kept my 
finger in carbonic acid air, which was near half an 
hour, I should not have known it had received any 
injury. On taking it out, the surface had a whitish 
appearance—Was this from the beginning of the for- 
mation of epidermis?—In the air—the experiment 
was made in a warm temperature—the smarting re- 
turned; in an hour the exposed skin was painful and 
looked angry, as the expression is: I again enclosed it 
in carbonic acid air; in six minutes I felt no more pain. 
After several hours I again removed the bladder, and 
soon felt the smarting return. 

During the hour after my finger had been for the 
first time taken out of the bladder, I had introduced it 
into a phial of oxygene air, for a few minutes, but was 
not sensible of increase of pain; nor can I say that the 
redness and angry appearance was owing to this cir- 
cumstance. 

The following experiments were made on three 
different persons:— 1. The raised epidermis of a 
blistered finger, after all action of the cantharides had 
ceased, was cut away in carbonic acid air. No pain 
was felt. The atmospheric air slowly mixed with the 
other in the glass cylinder, as I found by the dull 
manner in which a candle after some minutes burned 
in it; and now some slight pain was felt. The finger 
being put into oxygen air, a smarting came on, and 
lasted 20 minutes; but then became less. The finger 
was next put into air containing alkaline fumes; and 
the pain was much severer than ever.— 2. A second 
|P_45
blister being opened in the air, smarting pain came on. 
In a bladder of fixed air it soon went off.— 3. The epi- 
dermis was cut off from a blister on my own finger, which 
I instantly plunged into oxygene air; it felt as when 
salt is sprinkled on a cut: and the pain was, I am pretty 
sure, more severe than when my former blister was 
opened in the atmoshere. In carbonic acid air the 
pain in two minutes quite subsided, and returned when 
I exposed the bare skin to the atmosphere. 

At Oxford, in 1790, I had proposed to a distressed 
negro, to try to whiten part of his skin with oxygena- 
ted marine acid air. He was to exhibit the appearance, 
if it should be curious, for the relief of his family. 
His arm was introduced into a large jar full of this air, 
and the back of his fingers lay in some water impreg- 
nated with it at the bottom of the vessel. It was per- 
ceived that he had ulcerations from the itch between 
his fingers; and this made me very cautious about the 
experiments. In 12 minutes he complained of severe 
pain from the ulcers, and the arm was withdrawn. The 
back of his fingers had acquired an appearance as if 
white lead paint had been laid upon them, but this did 
not prove permanent. A lock of his hair was whi- 
tened by this acid.—Next day the ulcers became ex- 
tremely painful, and the hand swelled from the inflam- 
mation; this deterred him from a continunance of the 
experiment after he was cured of his complaint. You 
cannot safely impute the effect of this powerfully sti- 
mulating acid to its oxygene alone. 

But the fact stated by Dr. Ingenhousz is very agree- 
able to the common phænomena presented by wounds. 
Moreover, I have lately seen cancerous patients treated 
by the application of unrespirable air, with the most 
|P_46
astonishing success. In mentioning to Dr. Black the 
introduction of factitious airs into the Bath hospital, 
as a source of hope, I did not so soon expect an event 
which ages and nations have desired in vain. Obser- 
vations, extremely analogous to the experiments just 
related, were there made during the course of the treat- 
ment. See Dr. Ewart's pamphlet. Should it be 
invidiously observed by any reader of his narrative, 
that something similar had been tried before, it may be 
truly replied, that these trials were rather discourage- 
ments to the new application of elastic fluids; and that 
failure in former instances enhances the merit of the 
recent method. Mr. Magellan's case seems never to 
have been much known in England. 

It seems not improbable, that on certain ill-condi- 
tioned ulcers, oxygene externally applied has a saluta- 
ry effect, by occasioning greater action, both of the 
vessels which throw out the copious thin discharge, 
and of the absorbents. Many substances, usually ap- 
plied to such ulcers with success, as metallic salts, 
contain much oxygene, and some are most highly 
charged with this principle, as the red oxyds of metals. 
The following intelligence, if authentic, adds confir- 
mation to this opinion, and may prove useful. A few 
months ago, I was struck with the frequency of scro- 
phulous tumours among the poor of the county of 
Longford, in Ireland. Supposing that necessity might 
have occasioned the trial of many methods of cure, I 
enquired whether the people there had not some pe- 
culiar domestic practices in such complaints. A phy- 
sician referred me to a simple but very reputable old 
farmer, as remarkably successful in scrophulous sores. 
With this person I had an interview. In his practice, 
he had no view to gain; and that, in his principles, he 
had nothing of empirical imposture, he convinced me, 
|P_47
by at once disclosing his whole secret. He had him- 
self, many years ago, an ulceration of the submaxillary 
glands: This, after various unsuccessful applications, 
was healed by a rustic practitioner like himself. He 
obtained a knowledge of the remedy, by which, dur- 
ing a long life, he assured me, he had himself healed 
many such ulcers of the glands about the jaws. He 
was so little speculative, as never to have attempted 
the cure of an obstinate sore in any other seat. That 
he might effectually instruct me, he brought specimens 
of his simples. They were the leaves and stalks of 
wood-sorrel (oxalis acetosella), and the root of mea- 
dow-sweet (spiraea ulmaria). The sorrel he prepares 
by wrapping it in a cabbage leaf, and macerating it by 
its own juices in warm peat ashes. This pulp is ap- 
plied as a poultice to the ulcer, and left 24 hours: 
the application of sorrel is four times repeated; then 
the roots of the meadow sweet, bruised and mixed 
with the sour head or efflorescence that appears on 
butter-milk, left in the churn, are used in the same 
manner till the sore heals, which I was told always 
speedily happens; often in two or three weeks. 

The following extract of a letter from Mr. Edge- 
worth of Edgeworthstown, contains some supplemen- 
tary information, and will probably add so much to the 
credit of my information, as to obtain a trial for the 
remedy. 

"I have learned from Mr. Mills, that when he was 
about eight and twenty, he had two large scrophulous 
swellings in his neck, one under each ear, near the 
jaw; the marks they had left he shewed me. He was 
attended by a surgeon in the neighbourhood for some 
weeks, without receiving any benefit. A farmer, with 
|P_48
whom he was acquainted, recommended the applica- 
tion he mentioned to you, by which he was com- 
pletely cured. The man told him the names and 
quantities of the several ingredients, when he applied 
them, but did not till some years afterwards (when he 
was leaving this country for America) apprize him that 
the mystery of the cure (this was his expression) de- 
pends entirely upon the sorrel. This person had pre- 
dicted to Mills, that one of the sores, which had been 
lanced, would not heal so soon as that which had sup- 
purated of itself; and he found this to be true. Whilst 
he had scrophulous swellings, he was weak and un- 
healthy; from the time the wounds were healed, he 
has been strong and active; he is now eighty; and 
whilst he was relating these circumstances to me this 
evening, he kept pace with my horse up hill for half 
a mile, without any apparent effort. I mention this, 
because it is a common opinion (I suppose a vulgar 
error) that healing such sores is prejudicial to the ge- 
neral health. He has applied this remedy to upwards 
of an hundred different persons, every one of whom 
have been cured.—Seven years ago I remember 
having seen his son, who rents a considerable farm from 
me, with an enormous scrophulous swelling on his 
neck; he was too impatient to wait for a suppuration of the 
swelling, and would have the plaister applied to it 
whilst it was unbroken: the cure was protracted, but it 
was effectual; he has had no return of the complaint; 
a slight inequality of surface still remains on his neck; 
Mr. Mills has communicated his recipe to several, and 
in particular to a very intelligent person in this neigh- 
bourhood, who has employed it with unfailing success. 
All the patients complain of the severity of the appli- 
|P_49
cation; and in every ulcer to which it is applied, there 
takes place a remarkable change from a dead pale to a 
bright scarlet colour. "
July 17, 1794. 

This change of colour indicates communication of 
oxygene, which perhaps the oxalic acid of the sorrel 
contains in such a state of combination as easily to part 
with a portion. Now Dr. Darwin, in his Zoonomia, 
attributes scrophulous swellings of the glands to inirra- 
tibility, which, as I have conjectured, may arise from 
a certain deficiency of oxygene. These principles 
would supply an obvious theory, were we but certain 
of our facts. If however, as the preceding account 
implies, sorrel produces detumescence of the glands 
before suppuration, its application will be, I suppose, 
a more eligible practice than any now in use. Wri- 
ters in the Materia Medica may have applied deob- 
struent—their word of course—to this plant, but I 
remember no particular commemoration of its virtue 
in scrophula. Murray, a complier of extensive read- 
ing, has nothing to this purpose.—(Apparat. Medi- 
cam. III. 492-9). 


[^1. 
(a) Girtanner Antiphlogistische Chemic, p. 263. ^]