
|P_
|P_
TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, 
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF PORTLAND, 
CHANCELLOR, 
THE REVEREND DOCTOR BERDMORE, 
VICE-CHANCELLOR, 
THE HEADS OF COLLEGES AND HALLS, 
AND 
THE OTHER CONSTITUENT MEMBERS THEREOF, 
This humble Attempt to be useful,
IS, IN ALL FILIAL DUTY AND RESPECT, 
INSCRIBED BY
WILLIAM MARTIN TRINDER, 
A GRADUATE OF OXFORD, AND DOCTOR OF PHYSIC AT 
LEYDEN. 

|P_
[}AN 
ESSAY.}]
WE read, in the Holy Scriptures, not 
only of wine that maketh glad the heart of 
man, but of oil to make his face to shine, 
or his outside, for so the word ###foreign omitted###  fre- 
quently signifies, and it ought, in this place, 
Psalm civ. 15. so to be understood. 

The ancients accustomed themselves to 
the outward application of oil, in order to 
heighten the comeliness of their persons— 
and they did well: for what constitutes 
beauty more than the natural diffusion of 
gelatinous juices extracted from the aliment, 
and brought forward, through the arteries, 
to all parts of the body? or, if these be 
wanting, what better substitute can there 
be than oils properly applied? 

|P_6
This practice of inunction was so general, 
and so frequent, that our Saviour gently 
reproved Simon, the Pharisee, for omitting 
this instance of civility. Luke vii. 46.— 
The rich and honourable were anointed with 
oils of the greatest fragrance. [/1./] Thus 
due respect was shewn to our blessed Lord 
by having precious ointment poured upon 
his head. Mark xxvi. 7. 

But the ancients used oil not only for the 
decoration and refreshment of their persons, 
but for the preservation of their health and 
strength. After bathing, they rubbed them- 
selves over with ceromata to close the pores 
of the body, [/2./] and thus to give strength to 
the system. They also anointed their heads 
with ointments to prevent drunkenness. [/3./]
(Athenæus lib. xv. cap. 13.) Before en- 
|P_7
gaging in violent and fatiguing exercises, 
they always used ceromata, or medicated 
oils, to prevent strains, to make their limbs 
supple, and, by hindering transpiration, to 
preclude any great waste of strength. Now 
although it must be confessed that the an- 
cients were not the most improved anato- 
mists, yet their general and frequent prac- 
tice in the use of ointments and friction was 
excellent, being very preventative of disease, 
and conducive to health, as will appear from 
the following statement of facts. 

1st. All over the human body are innu- 
merable inhalants, which are the orifices 
and branches of the absorbent vessels that 
ultimately terminate in the great veins near 
the heart. These absorb and carry fluids 
into the body, but they cannot carry any 
out.

2dly. There are also innumerable exha- 
lants, which perforate the surface of the 
skin, that are the extremities of the arteries, 
and which carry fluids out of the body, but 
they cannot carry any in. According to 
Sanctorius, the transpiration from the skin 
|P_8
far exceeds, in quantity, all the excretions 
by the other emunctories, and, comparative- 
ly to alvine discharges, the proportion is as 
one to four, so that if the skin ejects twenty- 
four, the intestines shall discharge only six 
ounces. [/4./]

3dly. Animal, or vital heat, which is 
most necessary to the nutrition and preser- 
vation of the body, is generated by the de- 
composition in the lungs of atmospheric air 
by animal gas [/5./][/6./]. And hence it is, that the 
|P_9
more and quicker we inspire atmospheric air 
the warmer we become, as in running up 
hill, or in vehement reading and speaking. [/7./]
That vital heat is generated by the aforesaid 
decomposition in the lungs, appears from 
considering that animals, destitute of lungs, 
are not hotter than the circumambient air, 
whereas the vital heat of animals possessed of 
lungs is by no means dependent on the tem- 
perature of the air. In the human body it 
is hardly ever less than 95 degrees, or more 
than 105 of Fahrenheit's tongue thermometer; 
but if the living body, in a healthy state, be 
placed in contact to much hotter bodies, it 
will not acquire their excess; nor, if in the 
midst of much colder bodies, will it acquire 
their coldness; thus, on the coast of Africa, 
where the heat of the climate shall rise to 
140 degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, the 
human body will retain its natural heat of 
96 degrees, because of the evaporation of 
|P_10
sweat which generates coldness; hence it is, 
that the negroes in the West India Islands 
endure labour in the sun far better than white 
men, because, as it is said, of their quicker 
evaporation of perspirable matter from their 
skin and lungs. So again in the frozen re- 
gions of the North, the heat of the living 
body shall experience no material change; 
and this is providential, for if the living 
body had not the means to resist excessive 
heat, [/8./] the fluids would become too thin, 
run out, or putrify; and if it could not re- 
|P_11
sist excessive cold, the fluids of the body 
could not circulate, and, of course, become 
coagulant. 

This vital heat is the cause of that strong 
intestine action by which the solids of the 
body are expanded, the fluids broke down 
and divided, and superfluous and heteroge- 
neous matter separated and discharged. When 
it is sufficiently strong, in a healthy state, [/9./]
it forces the blood and juices into the extreme 
arteries, the skin becomes soft and glowing, 
and the flesh turgescent from that bland 
oleaginous aliment so well, and so univer- 
sally diffused. 

4thly. Friction, although far less pre- 
servative and restorative than bodily exercise 
in the open country air, especially if used to 
the point of fatigue, yet, in one particular, 
it is more serviceable, because of its topical 
application. 

Friction, by obliging the veins to admit 
of distension, causes the arterial blood more 
|P_12
abundantly to flow into them, hereby en- 
creasing the velocity of the circulation, dif- 
fusing the vital heat, and augmenting vigour; 
moreover, the venal blood, by means of 
friction, runs quicker towards the heart, 
which it stimulates to a greater propulsion of 
the blood and juices over the whole body. 

If cold coagulated blood be rubbed, in a 
glass mortar, it will again become a frothy 
liquid of a crimson colour. It is said, indeed, 
that this effect arises from fresh surfaces of 
blood being exposed to the atmospheric air, 
with the oxygen, of which it immediately 
combines, restoring it to the same floridity 
as when in the body; nevertheless, it is also 
true, that gentle friction so attenuates stag- 
nant blood, in bruises, that it will enter 
into the mouths of the bibulous veins. 

Friction moves and attenuates the other- 
wise immeable juices in the vessels that en- 
cumber and relax the nervous system; but if 
vehemently and immoderately used it excites 
inflammation, and, by too much, encreasing 
the contraction of the heat and arteries, the 
liquids exhale, and the body becomes parch- 
ed and dry. Immoderate labour, in like 
|P_13
manner, is prejudicial to the health, and it 
prevents longevity, for hard-working people 
soon look old; and it is observable, that 
women, in general, live longer than men. 

5thly. Oil, whether contained in the ce- 
lular membrane of the body, or externally 
applied, greatly, by its lubricity, facilitates 
muscular motion. It keeps off the coldness 
of the atmosphere; hence, fat persons are 
not so susceptible of cold as lean people, and 
it is the best preventive against chilblains. 
It gives whiteness to the tender skin; hence 
it is, that the fattest parts of the body are 
the whitest, as the breasts of young women. 
—It gives roundness and beauty to the hu- 
man form; for the skin, when not distended 
by it, contracts itself into unsightly wrinkles. 
It gives nourishment to the body, for being 
absorbed by the inhalants, it is carried, with 
the chyle, into the blood. If it be said that 
oil, externally applied, stops the excretory 
pores, thereby preventing sweat and insen- 
sible perspiration, I answer, from my own 
experience, that it does not, but it rather 
promotes both, especially if applied by brisk 
friction, for it cleanses the exhalants of that 
|P_14
ever encrusting luting sordes, which covers 
even the most delicate persons, and which the 
vapour bath soon discovers to every indi- 
vidual. [/10./] The ancients, who were in the 
frequent practice of inunction, never found 
plain oil to stop the pores; for when they 
wished to stop or hinder transpiration, they 
used wax with their oil; such were the 
precious ceromata, mentioned by Athenæus, 
(Deipnosoph 5.) as of saffron, sweet mar- 
joram, fenugreek, flower-de-luce, and of 
roses; and not thinking even these prepa- 
rations sufficiently obstructive of the pores, 
they, before engaging in gymnastic exer- 
cises, and after anointing themselves with 
oil, rolled themselves in the sand. 

From what I have written concerning the 
inhalants, the exhalants, vital heat, friction 
and oil, I think, that the following practice 
will be thought, by the public, reasonable, 
useful and important. 

|P_15
In incipient dropsy, particularly the leuco- 
phlegmatic, and anasarcous (arising from 
the debility of the vascular system), the chief 
cure is to strengthen the vessels by friction, 
and a stimulating oil; so that the absorbents 
shall take up the water from the cavities, 
and the perspiratory powers recover their 
wonted action. That the dropsy does not 
arise, as is commonly imagined, from an 
atony, or laxity of the whole body, and the 
viscera thereof, appears from this considera- 
tion, that many cachectic persons are not 
dropsical, and many who have cisted dropsy, 
are entirely free from any cachexy what- 
soever. 

In chronic rheumatism, owing to a se- 
rous colluvies of humours predominant 
about the moving fibres of the muscles; as 
also in stiffness, and rigidity of the joints 
and muscles, particularly in old military 
men, arising from frequent and long ex- 
posures to the injuries of the weather, and 
from old healed-up wounds and fractures; 
medicated oils, with a flesh-brush, together 
with electrical shocks on the stiffened parts, 
will be found very serviceable. 

|P_16
The fibres of old people are hard and ri- 
gid, their perspiration is little, and that 
bland vapour which formerly bedewed their 
bodies is no more; inunction, with friction 
to them, is most salutary, for the animal 
warmth and juices are hereby drawn into 
the skin, and the oil, by its nourishing powers, 
renovates and invigorates the whole system. 
The sagacious Sydenham had great success 
in the recovery of debilitated nature, by re- 
commending healthy young men as bedfel- 
lows to the aged and infirm; he said, that 
heat alone was not the cause of restoration, 
for the application of warm napkins did no 
good, (sec. i. cap. iv. p. 79.) it was therefore 
only to be ascribed to the mild oleaginous 
effluvia. Now, if the human oleaginous 
effluvia be so penetrating and balsamic as to 
afford revivifying nourishment by absorp- 
tion, why should not the oil of sweet-al- 
monds, for instance, do the same thing, 
especially when broke down and pressed in, 
by heat and friction. 

Soldiers that are exposed to excessive heats 
in hot countries, should frequently be ordered 
to rub their bodies with ceromata, to prevent 
|P_17
too great a waste of strength by perspiration; 
and when in cold countries, they are exposed 
to rain, and sleep in damp camps, they should 
be enjoined to follow the practice of inunc- 
tion; for being generally young men, such 
stimuli would quickly arouse their native 
heat, draw it to the surface, and keep it 
there, and also, by closing the inhalants, 
effectually shut out an otherwise too pene- 
trating a humidity. 

After hard labour, or excessive fatigue, the 
outward use of oil is wonderfully restora- 
tive and refreshing: this is not only testified 
by the practice of the ancient Athletæ, but by 
some mowers at Hendon, this summer, who, 
before the application, were nearly exhausted 
by excessive labour at task work, but af- 
terwards followed it up with ease and 
pleasure. 

After warm bathing in the winter season, 
the application of a ceroma is very advise- 
able, for by rendering the inhalants imper- 
vious to the cold air, colds are prevented, 
and, by closing the orifices of exhalants, the 
dewy, nutritious juice, and vital heat (drawn 
towards the skin by the bath) is then re- 
|P_18
tained, which must greatly warm and invi- 
gorate the system. 

An imperfect paralysis in the aged, not 
only arises from a deficiency of vigour, and 
a relaxation of nerves, strained and worn 
by various destroying causes, as gluttony, 
ebriety, &c. but often it is owing to a su- 
pineness of the vital principle, or the Anima- 
Medica, [/11./] for terror, or imminent danger, 
has often been the means of restoring those 
limbs (during the paroxysm of fear) that 
were before useless. Here then it seems, that 
impotency is not the cause, but sloth; surely 
then the natural and best cure must be ob- 
tained from exercise, friction, and stimulat- 
ing oil. 

Chilly, sedentary persons who ill endure 
the winter's cold, should frequently use 
friction, and a stimulating oil, for it is, 
through debility from want of exertion, that 
the arteries do not propel the fluids with 
such force as would prove sufficient to dis- 
tend the exhalants in the skin. 

|P_19
A nervous unhappiness, with susceptibi- 
lity of cold is often occasioned by a thick 
cacochymy of humours, not at all inflam- 
matory; in this case, after proper evacua- 
tion, it is proper to draw the juices to the 
surface of the body by light frictions with 
the aromata, so indeed as to promote the due 
circulation of the blood, but not by violent 
application, to encumber the heart and lungs 
by the reflux of these thick and foul hu- 
mours. The mind of man may be con- 
sidered figuratively as the axle-tree, round 
which the wheel of life can best turn, for 
although it may be unconscious of its power, 
yet it works wonders on the solids and fluids 
of the body, rectifying their irregularity, 
and reducing them to moderation, or else 
rendering them inordinate and destructive. 
But if the mind have power over the body, 
so also has the body a wonder-working power 
over the mind, for it is the blood that con- 
stitutes the temperament of different persons. 
The red part abounds in the sanguineous,
whose veins are large and cerulean, the head 
thin of hair, the flesh soft and abundant, 
and the cheeks of a rosy colour. Per- 
|P_20
sons of this temperament are fond of plea- 
sure, they are soon but not long angry, 
easily persuaded and inconstant. 

The albumenous part of the blood abounds 
in the petuitous, whose veins are small and 
almost imperceptible; the face pale, the flesh 
abundant, but cold and flaccid. The mind is 
usually placid and serene, regardful of deco- 
rum, and of the honestum, and of what it 
ought to do, but generally too lazy to exert 
its powers. 

When the blood is too concrete, having 
lost its proper fluidity, it forms the melan- 
cholic temperament. The flesh and hair are 
of a very dark colour, as among the Jews, 
(who are commonly of this temperament) the 
head frequently bald. The body is very lean 
and dry, the blood vessels dense and thin. The 
mind is constant to its purpose, not hasty, 
mindful of injuries, and remarkable for 
earnestness in thinking. 

From these temperaments are made up the 
rest, as the bilious, where the body is thin, 
the colour brown, the hair black, crisp and 
bushy, the veins large, the mind intelligent 
and resolute. 

|P_21
The phlegmatic are cold, not hairy, sub- 
ject to baldness, fat and unweildly, liable to 
tumours, the mind sometimes timid, generally 
inoffensive. The warm temperament is in 
body agile and robust, well covered with yel- 
low, thick, and copious pile, as the head 
with hair; the angles of the eyes, and also 
the face and lips are of a very red colour, the 
pulse full and frequent, the mind capable, 
but impetuous. 

But nevertheless, to vindicate the supre- 
macy of the mind over the body, it is to be 
observed that, by the medicinal and dietetic 
art, one temperament may be altered, in 
some degree into another, so that the pi- 
tuitous may become sanguineous, the san- 
guineous melancholic et vice versa. St. Paul 
saith, I keep my body under, and bring it 
into subjection: lest that by any means, 
when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a cast away. 1 Cor. ix. 27. 
Undoubtedly the mind can, and often does 
reduce the body to reason, by the means of 
diet and the forbearing virtues; hence the 
use of fasting and religious meditation: but 
here observe, that what would stimulate one 
|P_22
person, say of a hot temperament, into pas- 
sion, might only lift up another who is pitu- 
itous into reasonable comfort. 

Phlegmatic persons of irritable habits of 
body (whose circulation is weak, the blood 
not being sent in sufficient force to the sur- 
face, so as in a due degree, to promote per- 
spiration, and who by their inhalants, absorb 
more moisture from the atmosphere than 
stronger people), should perseveringly use 
friction, if not oil; they should also pay 
particular attention to diet. They should 
avoid sugar and butter, which, by thick- 
ening the juices, impedes the circulation. 
Instead of eating glary food, as pig-meat 
and fatted calf, they should be contented 
with a more drying and attenuating diet, 
which would prevent alarming portions 
of lymph from collecting in the lungs, or 
in the joints. True indeed it is, that al- 
though a person be charged with too much 
lymph he may continue in health, but how 
long these defluxions may remain benign 
and unhurtful, no one can say, for also true 
it is, that, by the adverse diameters of a 
very few vessels, the juices may soon become 
|P_23
stagnant and banefully acrimonious. The 
too abundant lymph should be discharged by 
drastic purges, at long intervals, and for 
diet, such as strengthens the elasticity of the 
fibres, should be recommended. Roast meat [/12./]
and game are proper; fruits, if any, should 
be somewhat austere, and also the wine; 
say good rough port, but ever let this dietetic 
rule be carefully observed, "ne quid nemis."

|P_24
Wine, if medically taken, augments the 
strength of the animal fibres and rarifies the 
juices of the body; but if immoderately 
drank, it excites a universal spasm that ends 
in weakness and relaxation, as the trembling 
hands and staggering gate of bacchanalians 
sufficiently evince. Wine after much use 
loses its stimulating power; hence it is that 
hard-drinkers proceed from bad to worse, 
from wine to the drinking of pure spirit; 
thus destroying their health, their reputation, 
and their life, for a very transient and miser- 
able satisfaction. [/13./] But wine, if mode- 
rately taken, enables the vessels of the body 
with encreased alacrity to take up and disperse 
nourishment over the system. It is of excel- 
lent use after fatigue; also in the cure of 
mental languors, and in urgent fears, for it 
|P_25
not only braces the fibres, but it tonifies the 
mind; and therefore it is that soldiers and 
sailors after a dram of spirituous liquor, 
despise danger, and joyously enter into a battle. 

Again, pituitous persons who use but little 
exercise, are particularly susceptible of the 
ill effects of a damp air, which although, by 
the thermometer, may not be colder than a 
dry one, is more penetrating because it con- 
ducts better, filling the inhalants with crude 
noxious vapour; hence swellings of the 
great joints of the limbs are frequent, which 
are mistaken for the gout. Certainly the 
best preservatives are strong daily exercise to 
the point of fatigue, so as to sweat; a dry 
cardiac diet; frequent friction with ceromata 
of essential oil, to counteract the baneful ef- 
fects of the atmosphere; and such cloathing 
as of wool close to the skin, which, being a 
bad conductor, will prevent the inhalants 
from improper absorption. [/14./]

|P_26
It is also not uncommon for such persons 
to be troubled with an aqueous, not a chyli- 
ferous, diabetes, for by checked exhalation, 
what is not discharged by perspiration and 
sweat, passes through the bladder; and their 
too copious absorption of circumambient 
fluids doubtless encreases the quantity of 
urine. [/15./] This very common, and too un- 
noticed, yet dangerous disease, may, I think, 
be abated if not entirely cured, by the fol- 
lowing practice: — If it arise from hectic 
fever, mucilages (perhaps with acids to cor- 
rect the hectic) are serviceable; but if from 
hysteric, or any transitory relaxing causes, 
mucilages and diffusible stimuli are more 
proper. In either case the primæ viæ should 
be cleansed first by ipecacuanha, then by 
rhubarb; strengtheners, and mild astrin- 
gents should be used; a dry binding diet, 
and morning and evening friction in a 
warm room, with a defensive oil against 
|P_27
damp weather, [/16./] should be earnestly recom- 
mended. 

Sometimes cold and damp air shall so relax 
the nervous system, as to deprive the patient 
of the use of his limbs; then a brisk vomit 
and the application, by friction, of warm 
medicated oil on the back bone, or on the 
inert limbs, will be of great service. 

The disease of children, called the rickets, 
after discharging the redundant lymph by 
vomits and detergent doses of rhubarb, is to 
be cured by friction, and with woollen cloths 
properly fumigated. 

It is not uncommon to see, in young se- 
dentary people, the skin discoloured, the 
muscles lank, the face pale and variously dis- 
|P_28
figured with pustules; the spirits gener- 
ally in a low state, and the body sluggish. 
The cure is to excite the perspiratory powers 
by bodily labour, friction, roast meat, and 
wine; and to heal the face by lenient in- 
noxious liniment. 

Old strains, and stubborn pains in the 
back, loins, and elsewhere, are, for the most 
part, curable by friction and medicated oil, and 
even incipient white swellings, that would 
otherwise cripple or render the limb useless, 
are thus to be dispersed and destroyed. 

Dry white scaly eruptions on the elbows 
and knees, even of long standing, may be 
cured by friction and medicated oil; [/17./] and 
here I must remark, that although the cure 
of the sea scurvy may be obtained by the 
vegetable acid of oranges and lemons, yet I 
submit to the consideration of the surgeons 
of the navy, whether or not, rubbing the 
|P_29
oil of the rinds on the diseased parts, would 
not accelerate the cure. 

After fevers, and some chronical dis- 
eases, the hair of the head falls off, either 
because the skin shrinks and becomes dry, 
through want of nutritious juices, or because 
through diseased relaxation, the stabulum of 
the hair becomes too weak. In the first case, 
baldness may be cured by oily liniments. In 
the second, good strengtheners of the system 
will be found most useful. 

If this publication should serve as a hint 
to a more enlarged mode of medical practice 
than the present, I shall, as a Clergyman of 
the Church of England, most heartily rejoice 
as having been the humble means of doing 
some good to my fellow-creatures. 

It may be necessary here to observe, that 
I had been seven years in holy orders, before 
I became doctor of physic, at Leyden, never 
thinking it at all improper to blend two very 
useful professions together, and more espe- 
cially, as our blessed Lord himself healed 
the diseases of the body as well as of the 
soul. 

|P_30
Indeed, I am strongly of opinion, as I 
have elsewhere observed in my Philan- 
thropic Monitor, that the public and private 
good resulting from such a union of profes- 
sions, would be great and incalculable. The 
unbeneficed clergy (being physicians) would 
enlarge the sphere of their usefulness, espe- 
cially amongst the poor people, and by ac- 
cepting moderate fees [/18./] from the yeomanry 
and gentry, they would soon disentangle 
themselves from that poverty and distress, 
which is as subversive of their respectabi- 
lity in civilized life, as of their deserved 
comfort. 

To the public at large, the advantages 
would be very great, having able prac- 
titioners always near at hand, and the pre- 
sent enormous expence of cure so properly 
cut down as to exclude none from the benefit 
of good medical advice. 

|P_31
If it be said, that the clergy would not be 
so competent in the healing art as the fa- 
culty, I will ask why not? They have the 
same advantages of learning at Oxford 
and Cambridge, where there are hospitals, 
as other medical students, and if degrees in 
physic are thought to be particularly ho- 
nourable from Oxford and Cambridge, surely 
the competency ought not to be disputed. 
By this union of professions in the clergy, 
as physicians, no injury would be done to 
surgeons, apothecaries, and chymists, nor no 
injustice to physicians of established fame and 
practice; for, if successful, they would still 
retain their patients, and even encrease the 
number, though, possibly, they might re- 
ceive fees more suitable to their respective 
merit. 
"He that is wise will ponder these things! "
☞ The Author will attend patients at 
home and abroad. 

Mill Hill, Hendon, Middlesex, 
August 31, 1797. 
