

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
[}of what has been communicated to us 
on the 
DIABETES MELLITUS, 
since the 
DISPERSION OF OUR NOTES 
of 
CAPTAIN MEREDlTH's CASE. }]
THIS part of our subject is extremely 
satisfactory; and of course we enter 
upon it with peculiar gratification. 

The most valuable of the communications 
have been received since the preceding part 
of the work has been in the hands of the 
Printer. Therefore, the view we have ex- 
hibited of the history, nature, and treatment 
of the disease, has derived no advantage from 
them. However, they must convey strong 
impressions of the correctness, and truth of 
our general principles. That these may be- 
come perfectly explained and established, 
we solicit a continuance of every commu- 
nication tending to throw additional light 
|P_2
on the subject. The present shall be re- 
corded separately, and without any remark; 
by which their own importance will appear 
more conspicuous. Any observations, or 
conclusions which may be thought necessa- 
ry to offer, or draw from them, will be sub- 
joined at the end, or deferred until another 
occasion. 

We embrace this opportunity of acknow- 
ledging the obligations we are under to our 
respectable correspondents—and while we 
admit the honourable testimony most of 
them have conferred on us, the medical 
world must generally allow, and appreciate, 
the disinterested efforts they have manifested 
for the improvement of medical science. 

[}From Dr. Duncan, Professor of the Institutes 
of Medicine, in the University of Edin- 
burgh. }]
Edinburgh, 13th Jan. 1797. 

IN a case of Diabetes which I treat- 
ed, about 20 years ago, I found that the use 
|P_3
of fat meat had a surprising effect in allevi- 
ating the thirst, and diminishing the quanti- 
ty of urine. But the effect was temporary 
only, and I have not found it to hold to the 
same extent with other patients. The he- 
patised ammonia will, I hope, attraft the at- 
tention of medical practitioners, and obtain 
a fair trial. 

[}From Dr. Falconer, of Bath. }]
Bath, 13th Jan. 1797. 

I SAW, about six years ago, a case 
of Diabetes in a gentleman, who really got 
it by drinking a liquor compounded of treacle 
and essence of spruce, fermented with water 
and yeast, forming spruce beer, of which he 
drank largely to reduce a corpulent habit. 
I tried with him to increase the perspiratory 
evacuations by Dover's powder, and the warm 
bath; but did not succeed. Indeed he was 
not a very tractable patient. I would re- 
commend this remedy with perhaps an in- 
creased quantity of ipecacuan to your con- 
|P_4
sideration, as it might produce perspiration, 
and check the canine appetite. Astringents 
I have seen tried, but with no advantage. 
Might not the mephitic alkaline water, im- 
pregnated with sulphureous gas, be of ser- 
vice? Might not a sulphureous ointment to 
the skin made with some rancid animal oil 
be a probable remedy? And might not a 
solution of sulphur in oil with some opiate, 
and mixed with starch or animal mucilage, 
be of service thrown up as a clyster? 

[}From Dr. Baillie, Lecturer on Anatomy 
and Surgery, and Physiciau of St. George's 
Hospital, London. }]
March 2nd, 1797. 

MY paper on Diabetes was written 
two years ago, and read at that time to a 
society of which I am a member. It was 
determined by the society that it should be 
published, and it became from that moment 
their property. I have, therefore, no right 
to comply with your request. I examined 
|P_5
not only the state of the kidneys, but of the 
stomach, the intestines, the glands of the 
mesentery, the liver, the spleen, and the 
pancreas, and I do not hesitate to mention 
to you generally, that I was induced to be- 
lieve, from the morbid appearances in the 
kidneys, that the principal seat of the disease 
was in them. This examination was made 
with a view to the different theories which 
have been formed about the cause of this 
disease, and I have added upon each of them 
a few observations. The paper will be pub- 
lished, as it was written two years ago, and 
nothing will be subjoined in consequence of 
what has been done lately. It will make 
me very happy if a method of treating the 
Diabetes, which will commonly prove suc- 
cessful, shall be discovered, and my pleasure 
will not be diminished by thinking that the 
discovery has fallen into your hands. 

|P_6
[}From Mr. Abernethy, Assistant Surgeon 
at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and Lec- 
turer on Anatomy and Surgery. }]
London, 12th April, 1797. 

I TOOK no notes of the diabetic 
cases which were in St. Bartholomew's Hos- 
pital, as they did not belong to surgery. I 
was only desirous of knowing if the kid- 
neys could form sugar. Once I had an op- 
portunity of examining the blood, and was 
satisfied with knowing that the serum was 
not at all sweet. I recollect that it was 
turbid. When the patients took milk, 
oranges, and sugar, the quantity of the lat- 
ter matter voided was greatly increased. 

[}From Dr. Beddoes, of Bristol. }]
Bristol, 10th Jan. 1797. 

I LAST night read your case of Di- 
abetes with the most eager pleasure, and 
have ever since reflected on it with the ut- 
|P_7
most satisfaction. It is a pledge of the ad- 
vance of medicine towards scientific princi- 
ples. I am curious to know the progress 
of the case, and also of Mr. Cruickshank's
ingenious researches. I had not been satis- 
fied with any thing in Diabetes; but I think 
your experiments, and practice, have thrown 
a ray of light on this obscure subject. 

I have been long looking out for diabetic 
patients, and your obliging communication 
will renew my diligence. One patient only 
I knew intimately—he has been thrice cured 
by the water here. I did not attend him, 
nor can I learn whether his urine was sweet. 
But it is certain he had thirft, emaciation, 
redness, voracious appetite, excessive dis- 
charge of urine (probably 20 pounds in the 
24 hours). He has thrice visited this place 
in 12 years, and each time been recovered 
in a fortnight. No medical man attended 
him, and his country doctor is dead. 

|P_8
April 14th, 1797. 

YOU ask my present opinion on 
consumption. Allow me generally to say, 
I have now no chemical theory of any one 
disease. I never held any such opinion. In 
different ways (at lectures, and in publica- 
tions), I started conjectures to be compared 
with facts; and now I think all those con- 
jectures are shewn to be erroneous by facts. 
I used to think my hypothesis on scurvy 
very probable, and I was confirmed in this 
idea by Dr. Trotter. But I at present think 
we were both mistaken. Good, however, 
has arisen from these speculations, as they 
have brought forward observations which 
otherwise apparently would never have been 
made, and some of these observations are 
useful in practice. When I publish my 
view of the medical treatment to be pursued 
in the pneumatic institution, I will unfold 
what I here say, and add my reasons. 

|P_9
[}From Dr. Currie, of Liverpool. }]
Liverpool, Feb. 20th, 1797. 

IN the course of my practice, I have 
met with a few cases of the Diabetes: chief- 
ly in the Liverpool Infirmary. I have seen 
it stopped in its progress by opiates, cantha- 
rides, alum and bark: but after the saccha- 
rine impregnation of the urine, I never 
knew it cured. One case I took much 
pains with about four years ago: but my 
register, and notes were purloined by some 
of the pupils, and I never could recover 
them. I used the tepid bath in this case, 
with milk, and with broth; but never could 
discover that the patient gained any weight 
during immersion, though I weighed him 
with the utmost accuracy before and after. 
In a case where, in consequence of an ob- 
struction of the pharynx, the patient died of 
hunger, after subsisting without swallowing 
upwards of thirty days, I had occasion to 
make the same remark. In the diabetic 
patient to which I allude, I weighed the in- 
|P_10
gesta, and the egesta (as far as they are ca- 
pable of being weighed), and I found that 
the patient changed a seventh part of his 
whole substance every twenty four hours! 

You will be pleased to hear that we have 
at present an opportunity of putting your 
practice into trial in a case of Diabetes now 
in our Hospital. It is under the care of my 
worthy colleague Dr. Gerard, to whom I 
have communicated your notes. From 
him or me you shall hear the issue. 

I agree with you in the expectations you 
form of the benefit to medicine from the 
new chemistry. I may mention the appli- 
cation of the nitric acid to the cure of lues, 
communicated by Mr. Scott of Bengal to 
Sir Joseph Banks. I have proved this prac- 
tice in various instances, and can assure you 
of its extraordinary success. I give one 
drachm of the acid daily in a pint and a 
half, or two pints of water. The success 
of the nitric acid in this disease, has induced 
me to propose its trial in the yellow fever 
|P_11
of the West Indies (in which mercury seems 
to be the only remedy on which any depen- 
dance is placed) and I have written to Sir 
Joseph Banks to request his taking measures 
to bring this remedy under the notice of 
Government. In the meantime I have 
written to the Windward Islands, and Ja- 
maica, on the subject. 

18th March, 1797. 

The case which I mentioned to you of 
Diabetes has been strictly attended to by my 
friend Dr. Gerard, who has noticed all the 
particulars you would wish in a regular 
journal, which will be transmitted to you 
when the issue is known. 

We wish much to have a small quantity 
sent by the coach of your hepatised ammo- 
nia, as we are doubtful whether we have 
succceded in making it here, and we think 
the patient is in a state to be benefited by it. 

There is no question about the anti-vene- 
real effects of the nitrous acid. That which 
|P_12
I have used has been nitrous, not nitric; for 
I had not the latter by me, and I found the 
former succeed. Whether it is equally ef- 
ficacious with mercury in all cases, &c. must 
be lest to more extensive experience. 

[}From Dr. Trotter, Physician to his 
Majesty's Fleet. }]
The communications of Dr. Trotter, contain 
a further account of our second case of Diabe- 
tes, subsequent to the reproduction of the dis- 
ease by the use of fruits, wine, &c.; and it 
will be perceived, a return to our plan of treat- 
ment again removed the disease; but from ano- 
ther indulgence in forbidden things, the disease 
returned. The consequences to the patient may 
be very readily apprehended. 

Portsmouth, 27th Jan. 1797. 

 I BEG leave to thank you for Cap- 
tain Meredith's case, which has afforded me 
a fund of information and entertainment. 

|P_13
I think with you on the subject of pneu- 
matic medicine, and your able induction of 
its doctrine, in the masterly treatment of 
Diabetes, will give a vast support to the 
truths which it embraces. 

3d April, 1797. 

IT would have given me much plea- 
sure to have returned you satisfactory an- 
swers to your queries concerning the urine 
of scorbutics; but such is the healthy Condi- 
tion of this fleet, from the effectual means 
of prevention, that scurvy has scarcely ap- 
peared for some months. 

I have many objections to offer against 
former experiments on this subject, and I 
think the whole unsatisfactory. Where 
trials are to be made, they ought to be done 
in the advanced stage of the disease, and 
when the patient has for a day or two ab- 
stained from salted meat, and before recent 
vegetables are touched. The urine in scur- 
vy is small in quantity, dark coloured, and 
may be called highly animalised; but its 
|P_14
chemical properties have never been exactly 
ascertained. 

In scurvy there is little thirst. The ap- 
petite is generally good, even for salted 
meat; but fresh vegetables are always high- 
ly grateful. 

Emaciation succeeds the use of the acid 
fruits when given in large quantities in in- 
veterate cases, and the appetite declines. I 
have not seen the exhibition continued 
longer than a cure was necessary. The 
urine becomes pale, and larger in quantity 
than the liquids taken in. 

In proportion to the quantity of lemon 
juice taken in, sometimes in a day or two, 
the blood regains its florid colour: I have 
known this colour, during the cure, brighter 
than in the natural state. 

Nitre dissolved in vinegar, in 152 cases, 
by two able navy surgeons, did not produce 
any favourable appearances in scurvy. 

|P_15
Three cases of inveterate syphilis, have 
been cured here by nitric acid, as described 
by Mr. Scott in Dr. Beddoes last work. 

I have visited your patient the General
thrice. As soon as he returned to your plan 
of diet, the urine became natural in quality, 
and decreased from eight to three pints a 
day. Whether this relief should be perma- 
nent or not, it is decisive testimony of the 
efficacy of your practice, more especially 
when we consider the trial is in a case of so 
many years standing. 

I have never known a case of Diabetes 
among seamen, nor have any of my naval 
acquaintances. 

You have thus added another triumph to 
the pneumatic physicians, which blends 
with it relief to human misery hitherto in- 
curable. 

P. S.  Mr. Hatcher sends his compliments; 
he has just seen the General, whose urine 
|P_16
the last 24 hours did not exceed one pint 
and a half. 


16th April, 1797. 

SINCE my last I think the Gene- 
ral has gained some strength, and looks 
better. He has diligently persevered in the 
animal diet, and taken as much in a venison 
state as he could obtain. This being the 
case, and all kinds of wine, and malt li- 
quors being left off, we cannot expect that 
relish for food which we observe in other 
conditions. Of his appetite, however, there 
is no reason to complain; his food certainly 
nourishes. His pulse in the right arm is 
about 84, of due strength; but at the other 
wrist it has always been different, probably 
you observed this at Woolwich. A slight 
clamminess is felt in the mouth; but no 
thirst. He takes an opiate and sleeps well; 
and gets out of doors in this fine weather. 
His cough is almost gone, and he expecto- 
rates with ease. His feet are now comfort- 
ably warm, and I think the skin begins to 
do its office; the scurf has fallen off. To- 
|P_17
morrow he will begin to take the following 
chalybeate pills. 

℞ Rubig. Ferri ʒss.
Magnesia ust. gr. xx 
Pulv. Zinzib. gr. x 
Ol. Olivar. fi. mass. dividenda 
in pil. No. xij—Sum. ij. ter die. 

The General drinks a small tumbler of 
lime water three times a day; but the hy- 
drogeno-sulphurated ammonia rather palled 
the stomach, and so he left it off. He also 
drinks a little hollands, or brandy and water; 
being spirits free from saccharine matter. 

Things being in this train in a case of 
such long standing, the whole account is 
very flattering: suffice it to say, the patient 
thinks himself in paradise, compared with 
his former sufferings. 

28th April, 1797. 

IN my last I informed you that I 
had ordered a pill of the Rubigo Ferri for 
|P_18
the General. There appeared strong 
symptoms of a different disposition of body 
being induced, from that which attended 
the discharge of the saccharine urine. The 
fetor of the urine had become uncommonly 
offensive, a very short time after voiding it. 
There was unusual languor and anxiety for 
the vinous stimulus, I therefore thought it 
fair to try the oxyd of iron. 

The urine, however, continues much the 
same in quantity, and quality; but still I 
think for a few days our patient has been 
losing ground; and though the appetite is 
not so deficient, the emaciation seems to in- 
crease. He has uniformly hankered after 
the forbidden cup, and though he is satisfied 
with the idea, that indulgence must be fa- 
tal, it is in vain to resist his importunities. 
For two days past he has taken a glass and 
a half-ful of Madeira wine—the urine has 
increased some ounces beyond the usual 
quantity. 

|P_19
I am sorry that the fleet being ordered to 
sea will prevent me from detailing the fu- 
ture occurrences of this singular case. I 
have urged the plan to be continued, but 
doubt of its being carefully adhered to. 

Dr. Trotter's doubts have, we are sorry 
to say, been fully realised, as the following ex- 
tract of a letter shews. 

Portsmouth, 7th May, 1797. 

THE General is gone to Port- 
chester to try the effects of a change of situ- 
ation; but it will be of no avail. 

Since Dr. Trotter left him, he has return- 
ed to his favourite plan, and eats of every 
thing, as apple-pudding, tea with sugar, &c. 
and drinks wine. 

His urine has increased, it has become 
pale, and sweetish; his thirst is returned; 
in short he has again relapsed into his dis- 
ease. How much this is to be regretted! 

|P_20
We sincerely lament the apparent issue of this 
our second case of Diabetes Mellitus, especially 
as we have every reason to think it might have 
terminated more favourably. With extreme 
pleasure we communicate the following letter 
from Captain Meredith, as it shews the conti- 
nuation of a full re-establishment of health; 
even under unfavourable circumstances in diet 
and exercise. We regret his return to wine, 
as it annihilates our prospects of the prevention 
of gout. We have only to hope, that he will 
be enough guarded, so as to obviate another at- 
tack of Diabetes. 

[}From Captain Meredith. }]
Ireland, Youghall, 10 May, 1797. 

I DID not experience the smallest fa- 
tigue by my journey from Woolwich to 
Plymouth, though I travelled two days and 
a night in the coach. I remained a month 
at Plymouth, where my duty was moderate, 
but where the civilities of my friends led 
me to frequent indulgencies at the table, 
|P_21
and was tempted to drink wine, though I 
never exceeded a pint of port. On the 
20th April, I embarked in perfect health, 
and proceeded by sea to Ireland. I remain- 
ed on board until the 8th instant. I was 
sick at sea, and frequently vomited a sourish 
matter. I disembarked on the 8th, in good 
health, and we marched eight miles, and 
next day seventeen miles; we have still 130 
miles to go, and I shall walk every inch of 
the ground; for so far as we have gone, I 
have not been sensible of more uneasiness 
than what I usually experienced before my 
illness, after such a march. My appetite is 
good, but not keen; I have no thirst; sleep 
well; and feel every way in health. My 
urine never exceeds a quart in twenty four 
hours, its colour, smell, and taste are per- 
fectly urinous. This morning I weighed 
141/2 stone. 

|P_22
[}From Mr. Marcet, at present of Edin- 
burgh. }]
Mr. Marcet is a zealous student in physic, 
and a candidate for a medical degree; the sub- 
ject of his Thesis, Diabetes. Our mutual friend 
Dr. Woollcombe, conveyed to him an account of 
Captain Meredith's Case previous to the dis- 
persion of the notes on it. Mr. Marcet an- 
nounced it at Edinburgh, and at this time 
there was one patient with the disease in the 
Infirmary under the care of Dr. Hope, who 
adopted our treatment. An account of this 
case, by permission of Dr. Hope, Mr. Mar- 
cet has transmitted, as also an opinion of Dr. 
Rutherford's with regard to the operation 
of the lungs in this disease. Mr. Marcet is en- 
titled to our warmest thanks for the interest he 
has taken in the support of our ideas of the 
disease; an interest founded on his own anxiety 
for the promotion of medical science, as person- 
ally we are unacquainted. We hope he will 
permit us, in this manner, to make our ac- 
knowledgments. 

|P_23
Edinburgh, 14th April, 1797. 

Dr. Rutherford has repeatedly ex- 
pressed his regret, in never having had an op- 
portunity of examining a diabetic body after 
death. He is persuaded that the changes 
have not been looked for where they might 
have been found. He believes that the lacteal 
absorbents, and the lymphatics of the lungs, 
would be found enlarged, and perhaps the 
texture of the lungs altered. The supposi- 
tions with regard to the lungs is founded on 
his notion, that the difference in the quan- 
tity of urine, beyond the fluids and even so- 
lids taken in during certain states of the Di- 
abetes Mellitus, is to be accounted for, from 
the extraordinary production of water on the 
surface of this organ, which he supposes to 
be re-absorbed; and not from any absorp- 
tion from the surface of the body by the skin. 

4th May, 1797. 

I SEND you an extract of the case 
of Walker, with Dr. Hope's permission, and 
you may do with it whatever you please. 
|P_24
The effects of the animal diet on the quan- 
tity and quality of the urine are perfectly 
evident, though the case could not be car- 
ried to an absolute termination, from the 
impatience and instability of the patient. 
In Hospitals, where patients see three or 
four times in the day every person about 
them eating vegetables, a trial of an entire 
diet of animal food can hardly be expected. 

[}Abstract of a Case of Diabetes Mel- 
litus, in the Royal Infirmary, at 
Edinburgh. }]
[}James Walker, a field-labourer, was 
admitted by Dr. Hope into the Clinical 
Ward, with a confirmed Diabetes, on 
the 1stNovember, 1796. }]
"His appetite is voracious, and his thirst so 
urgent, as to make him desire from ten to 
sixteen quarts in twenty four hours. His 
urine is præternaturally copious, and he has 
a frequent inclination to pass it. It is lim- 
|P_25
pid, of a light green colour, and having a 
slight sweet taste. He is much emaciated; 
and his feet and ancles swell towards even- 
ing. Pulse 96. Skin parched and rough. 
Body costive. "

He recollects, on a frosty morning in De- 
cember 1795, having slept some hours in 
an open cart. On the May following the 
above symptoms appeared, and have increas- 
ed ever since. He has several times been 
the object of medical treatment; but with- 
out permanent relief. 

2nd. 

Milk daily, and as much drink as he 
chooses. 

3d. 

Urine 22 pounds. Ingesta 20 pounds. 

4th. 

Urine 13 pounds. Ingesta 17 pounds. 
The urine becomes turbid on the addition of 
lime water; when evaporated it affords an 
|P_26
extract like molasses, which is sweet to the 
taste. This matter mixed with lime, ex- 
hales the odour of ammonia. 

From this day to the 29th December, he 
remained nearly in the same state, the quan- 
tity of urine fluctuating between 12 and 18 
pounds in 24 hours. During this interval 
he took some ferrum vitriolatum in the form 
of pills; used the cold shower bath, and 
took occasionally some emetics and laxa- 
tives;—the stomach being at times derang- 
ed, and the costiveness very obstinate. Under 
this treatment he seemed to get a little 
stronger, but without any important change 
in the general symptoms of the disease. It 
was agreed to try the effects of animal food, 
as lately given with success by Dr. Rollo at 
Woolwich, an account of which was trans- 
mitted by Dr. Woollcombe to Mr. Marcet. 

December 29th. 

Dr. Hope gave the following report. In- 
gesta 17 pounds; urine 13 pounds. Five 
|P_27
pounds of this urine have afforded 51/2 ounces 
of a thick saccharine extract. 

He has had for a month, an unpleasant 
sense of burning heat in the soles of his feet 
during the night. 

He is directed to abstain from vegetable 
food in every shape. 

To have two eggs for breakfast. Boiled 
meat and stakes alternately for dinner. Eggs, 
or cheese for supper. For drink eight pounds 
of weak beef tea, and two pounds of weak 
peppermint water. 

30th. 

Solid ingesta about two pounds; drink 
ten pounds; urine nine pounds. 

Let him have two pounds of flesh meat 
for dinner; half a pound of cheese for sup- 
per, and three eggs for breakfast—drink as 
before. 

|P_28
31st. 

Ingesta (drink, and food) ten pounds; 
urine five pounds, which exhales an unusu- 
ally strong urinous smell. Had a partial 
sweat over the trunk and head in the night. 
Mouth moist; no sourness of stomach. 

January 1st, 1797. 

Solid ingesta as usual; drink nine pounds; 
urine eight pounds, more limpid than yes- 
terday, and has a sharp acid odour. The 
breath has the same smell. The colour of 
the urine, however, is not changed, on ad- 
dition of syrup of violets. 

There is slight headach and sickness. The 
tongue appears much cleaner than usual. 
Has had a stool. Contin. diæta animalis. 

2nd. 

Solid ingesta the same; drink eight 
pounds; urine six pounds. No sickness or 
headach; tongue clear; the burning heat 
|P_29
of the feet as before. One loose stool. 
Contin. 

3d. 

Drink 10 pounds; urine 71/2 pounds, of a 
deeper yellow than formerly; tongue natu- 
ral. Contin. 

4th. 

Drink ten pounds; urine seven pounds. 
Contin. 

5th. 

Drink nine pounds; urine 61/2 pounds, 
more yellow, with a peculiar (not urinous) 
odour. Contin. 

6th. 

No report, as last night he went out, and 
returned to the ward drunk, and his urine 
could not be measured. 

7th. 

Drink 71/2 pounds; urine 6 pounds, and it 
has the same peculiar smell. 

|P_30
8th. 

Drink 71/2 pounds; urine 6 pounds; body 
costive. Contin. diæta animalis. Sum: sta- 
tim pil. rhœi. comp. ℈1 et iterum eras mane. 

9th. 

Drink six pounds; urine four pounds; a 
copious stool this morning; strength not 
changed since he began the animal food. 
Contin. et habeat aq. menth. piper. lbiv pro 
potu. minuatur quantitas decocti carnis ad 
lbiv. 

10th. 

Solid food as formerly; drink seven 
pounds; urine five pounds; no stool. Sum: 
statim pil. rhœi comp. ℈ 1. 

11th. 

Drink six pounds; urine four pounds; 
three stools this morning. Contin. diæta 
animalis. 

|P_31
12th. 

Drink six pounds; urine four pounds; 
two stools—he thinks his strength is some- 
what impaired within these two or three 
days. Adeat cras mane balneum frigidum. 

13th. 

Drink seven pounds; urine five pounds; 
bore the bath well. Contin. 

14th. 

Drink eight pounds; urine six pounds. 
Contin. 

15th. 

Drink eight pounds; urine six pounds. 

16th. 

Solid food as before; drink eight pounds; 
urine six pounds, is of a light straw colour, 
and with the peculiar smell it has had for 
sometime. 

|P_32
The urine of the 14th being evaporated, 
afforded matter of considerable consistence, 
with a strong saline, but scarcely percepti- 
ble sweetish taste. 

17th. 

Drink eight pounds; urine six pounds; 
thinks he is weaker. 

18th. 

Drink eight pounds; urine 51/2 pounds. 
Contin. 

19th and 20th. 

Drink each day eight pounds; urine six 
pounds. Contin. 

21st January. 
"
Drink seven pounds; urine five pounds. 
He has lest the Infirmary to-day by his own 
desire to return to the country. "

4th May. 

Dr. Hope told me a few days ago, that he 
had just then received a letter from Walker, 
|P_33
who says that since he left the Infirmary he 
has become weaker; and there is some ex- 
pectation of his returning soon to the Hos- 
pital to resume his treatment. 

But it is doubtful whether when he was 
in the Clinical Ward he observed strictly 
the diet prescribed. At least he was accus- 
tomed to go about freely; and the nurse 
told me repeatedly, that she suspected he did 
not entirely abstain from indulgencies of eat- 
ing and drinking out of the house. 

[}From Dr. Cleghorn, Lecturer in Chemis- 
try, and one of the Physicians to the Infir- 
mary at Glasgow. }]
Glasgow, May 1, 1797. 

SOME months ago I was honoured 
with your excellent pamphlet on Diabetes. 
At that moment I had two diabetic pa- 
tients in the Royal Infirmary of this place, 
and I began instantly to treat them on your 
plan. They are both cured; and I have 
delayed so long to thank you for your po- 
|P_34
liteness, in the hope that I might be able to 
inform you of this new success. 

[}CASE I. }]
[}John M'Lean, a Porter, Æt. 38. }]
December 9th, 1769, 

Four months ago had a fever, after 
which, while yet weak, he began to work 
hard. Soon afterwards he observed his 
urine more abundant than usual, amount- 
ing daily to 24 pounds, or more. 

Though his appetite be voracious, he be- 
comes leaner from day to day, and is so 
weak that he cannot walk a few steps with- 
out panting. His mouth is parched, tongue 
red, thirst extreme, belly costive. Pulse 84. 

A few days ago he had a slight cough, 
with pain in the right breast; but these 
complaints have abated. 

|P_35
The feelings about the stomach when he 
thinks himself hungry, differ from those he 
formerly had; they are more uneasy, and 
the uneasiness is less removed by taking food. 
He is often troubled with flatulence; and 
complains constantly of weakness or pain in 
the back and loins. Has used no medicines. 

On examining the urine it was found lim- 
pid and very sweet. A pound of it yielded 
by evaporation more than an ounce of a thick 
brown extract, like treacle in appearance 
and taste. 

December 10th. 

He was ordered an ounce of castor oil, 
and the same quantity of compound tinc- 
ture of senna. His loins were directed to 
be rubbed evening and morning with ano- 
dyne balsam. 

Equal parts of kino and rust of iron, form- 
ed into pills of five grains, with extract of 
chamomile, were to be given, two for a dose 
thrice a day. 

|P_36
His drink and urine were ordered to be 
measured daily, and the following reports, 
abridged from the Infirmary Register, shew 
the result. 

11th and 12th. 

One stool; urine 28 pounds; has drank 
about 14 pounds, besides the usual allow- 
ance of beer and broth. 

13th. 

Urine 27 pounds; drink 8 pounds; has 
had double allowance of food. Belly natu- 
ral. To take 8 pills daily. 

14th. 

Feels himself a little easier and stronger. 
To drink a pint of alum whey daily at dif- 
ferent times. To have the oil and tincture 
of senna when costive. 

In this course he persevered till the 17th 
of January, 1797. The quantity of his 
urine diminished daily. On the 16th De- 
cember it amounted only to 20 pounds; 
|P_37
next day to 18, next to 15, next to 13; but 
on the 20th it rose to 16 pounds, without 
any cause that could be pointed out, unless 
the increase proceeded from costiveness. 
Next day it fell again to 13; on the 24th 
it rose to 15: after which it varied from 13 
to 71/2 pounds. This was the quantity void- 
ed on the 17th January. It never fell be- 
low 71/2; most commonly it was between 8 
and 10 pounds. Meantime the patient con- 
sidered himself as cured. He slept com- 
fortably, sometimes not rising during the 
night, never oftener than once. The feel- 
ings about his stomach were more agree- 
able; his countenance looked less ghastly, 
and he felt his strength returning apace. 
On examining his urine, however, I had the 
mortification to find it nearly as sweet as 
ever. I considered the cure therefore as 
very incomplete, and I expected that the 
urine would soon begin to increase, as it had 
uniformly done in every case that I have hi- 
therto seen, and I have seen a considerable 
number. 

|P_38
While under this painful apprehension I 
received Dr. Rollo's pamphlet, which seem- 
ed to me to contain a more distinct theory, 
and a more reasonable practice than I had 
ever met with before. 

As I could not immediately procure the 
hepatised ammonia, I ordered him to use for 
drink 4 pounds of water containing a drachm 
of lixiva sulphurata. The alum whey to be 
continued. 

January 18th. 

Urine 8 pounds, with very little sweet- 
ness. Thirst increased, as he thinks, by the 
solution. The solution was omitted. Four 
drops of hepatised ammonia were added to 
a pound of water. Of this he was directed 
to use from 2 to 6 pounds daily, (for the 
sake of brevity I shall afterwards call this the 
ammoniated water.) 

19th. 

Has taken about 4 drops of the amm. hep. 
Remarkably sleepy. Urine 7 pounds. 

|P_39
Omit the alum whey; continue the am- 
moniated water. 

20th. 

Urine 8 pounds, sweet. Has used vege- 
tables and milk freely. Took 3 pounds of 
the ammoniated water. 

The necessity of abstaining from vege- 
tables was explained, and enforced, and he 
was ordered to continue the water. 

21st and 22d. 

He took only 2 pounds of the ammo- 
niated water. Urine 8 pounds. 

Two drops were added, making 6 to each 
pound of water. 

23d. 

Urine about 7 pounds, less saccharine; 
has drank 4 pounds of the water. 

From this date to the 30th the urine was 
daily 7 or 8 pounds, and it was less sweet, 
|P_40
though still perceptibly so. On the 30th, 
7 drops were mixed with each pound of 
water, and given as formerly. 

From the 1ft February the patient came 
under the care of Dr. Richard Millar, who 
resolved to go on with the same experiment. 
On the 3d the urine fell to 61/2, but was still 
sweet. 

February 6th. 

Ammoniated water 4 pounds; urine 7 
pounds, still sweetish. 

Besides the medicines, he was desired to 
drink a pound of lime water daily. 

7th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; lime wa- 
ter 1 pound; a very good night; no thirst; 
urine 51/2 pounds, sweet. 

8th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; no lime 
water; urine 6 pounds, sweet. Griping and 
tenesmus. The oil to be repeated. 

|P_41
9th. 

Urine 7 pounds, still sweet; ammoniated 
water 3 pounds; no head-ach; but there is 
a little pain in the belly. 

10th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; urine nearly 
7 pounds, not so sweet. 

11th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; lime wa- 
ter 1 pound; urine 51/2 pounds, less sweet. 

12th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; no lime 
water; urine 6 pounds. 

13th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; urine 7 
pounds, still sweet. 

14th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; lime wa- 
ter 1 pound; urine above 6 pounds, not so 
sweet. 

|P_42
15th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; urine 61/2
pounds, less sweet. Eight drops of the he- 
patised ammonia to each pound of water. 

16th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; no per- 
ceptible effect from the additional drop; 
urine about 6 pounds, still sweet. 

17th, 18th, and 19th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; urine daily 
51/2 or 6 pounds, less sweet. 

He was directed to take 5 drops among a 
little water every second hour, and to swal- 
low them immediately after mixture. 

From the 19th to the 23d, the urine was 
from 5 to 6 pounds, much less sweet. 

24th. 

Several loose stools of a natural smell, 
which were checked by a grain of opium in 
the morning; urine about 3 pounds. The 
|P_43
medicine was omitted for this day, and the 
opium ordered to be repeated, if necessary. 

25th. 

Looseness returned with violent griping, 
and was relieved by a grain of opium and by 
fomenting the belly. Slept well; urine 3 
pounds, of a natural smell, and hardly sweet. 

The ammonia hepatisata and lime water 
were repeated; the opium omitted. 

26th. 

Purging returned. Took a grain of opium 
at 12 o'clock last night, since which he has 
had 2 loose stools. Urine 31/2 pounds, natu- 
ral. Omit the medicines, repeat the opium, 
if necessary. 

27th and 28th. 

Urine 4 pounds, nearly natural. Medi- 
cines to be repeated. 

March 1st-3d. 

Urine 5 or 51/2 pounds, nearly natural. 

|P_44
4th. 

Urine 5 pounds, not so natural. 

The ammonia hepatisata never produced 
head-ach; it excited merely a sense of heat 
for a few minutes in the region of the sto- 
mach extending to the right side. Desired 
to take 50 drops in the day. 

5th and 6th. 

Urine 51/2 pounds, not so natural. 

7th. 

Urine 5 pounds, neither of a natural smell, 
nor is it very sweet. Directed to take 60 
drops daily. 

8th and 9th. 

Took 66 drops. Urine 5 pounds, less na- 
tural. 

10th. 

This moming took 15 drops at once, 
with no other effect than a sense of heat in 
the stomach. Urine 6 pounds, less natural 
in taste and smell. 

|P_45
Finding himself strong enough, he asked 
leave to go home (to the suburbs of Glas- 
gow) to manage some business which re- 
quired his presence. He promised to ab- 
stain from vegetables, to take his drops, and 
to return if he became worse. I have seen 
him several times at work, and this day, be- 
ing the 10th of May, I received from his 
own mouth the following account. 

In 24 hours his urine is about 5 pounds. 
He tastes it very often, and it has never been 
sweet, but after getting little animal food 
for days together (which has happened more 
than once) it has sometimes been of a sour 
smell. Formerly he could carry on a wheel- 
barrow three hundred weight; at present 
he carries one hundred weight, and he can 
walk as well as ever. Two days ago he 
went express to Paisley, received an answer 
to the letter he carried, and returned to 
Glasgow in three hours and a half (about 
141/2 miles.) Occasionally he has taken 60 
drops a day of the hepatised ammonia, 
which he likes, because it gives him an 
|P_46
agreeable feeling of warmth, and never pro- 
duces any inconvenience. For two weeks, 
however, he has had none, since which his 
urine has not increased in quantity, has not 
been sweet, and when evaporated lately by 
himself, and by a neighbour of his, whose 
curiosity he has excited, it yielded no sugar. 
The residuum could not be distinguished 
from that of an equal quantity of healthful 
urine, evaporated at the same time with 
great care and sagacity. 

The only kind of animal food that he can 
procure in sufficient quantity is blood, which 
he mixes with fat and a little meal. Even 
this homely fare he finds it difficult at pre- 
sent to procure regularly. 

He was always lean, and is now rather 
more so than before his fever; but though 
he works very hard, he thinks himself 
stronger, and more fleshy than when he left 
the Infirmary. He sleeps well; is regular 
in his belly, and free from every complaint, 
except occasional pains about the muscles of 
|P_47
his breast and arms, arising obviously from 
the intense colds to which he has been very 
much exposed, as he plies near the river 
from morning to night. He is the father of 
several children, but since he has been seized 
with Diabetes—Coitus nullus. Erigitum 
nunquam: ne quidem semel rigescit. 

About a month before he left the Infir- 
mary, the other patient gave the same ac- 
count of himself. 

[}CASE II. }]
[}John Roger, Æt. 40, a Shoemaker. }]
January 10th, 1797. 

For two months his urine has been pro- 
fuse, amounting daily to 20 pounds or more. 
It is limpid and sweet, yielding by evapora- 
tion an ounce of thick sweet matter, like 
treacle, from every pound. 

|P_48
He is thin and weak; habitually thirsty; 
for some days past has felt pain between his 
shoulders, and for a week his legs have been 
œdematous. Appetite keen; pulse and belly 
natural. 

Knows nothing to which he can attribute 
his complaint. Has used bitters, and other 
medicines, without material benefit. 

The astringent pills, and alum whey, were 
ordered for him, as for M'Lean. 

12th. 

Urine 36 pounds. 

13th. 

Urine 30 pounds. 

14th. 

Urine 23 pounds. 

15th. 

Urine 201/2 pounds. 

|P_49
16th. 

Urine 211/2 pounds; thirst excessive; sleeps 
ill; pulse full and hard. 

The medicines were omitted. He was 
directed to drink a solution of lixiva sulphu- 
rata, one drachm to four pounds of water, 
and to use animal food. 

He got castor oil, with tincture of senna, 
and at bed-time had a draught, with 25 
drops laudanum, and 30 of antimonial wine. 

17th. 

Rested well; urine 21 pounds; likes the 
drink. 

18th. 

Three stools; was sick, and vomited after 
supper; thirsty; urine 9 pounds, still sweet. 

The solution was omitted, and the draught 
repeated. 

|P_50
19th. 

Urine 14 pounds, very sweet. No stool. 
The draught was omitted, and 4 drops of 
the hepatised ammonia were given in a 
pound of water as for M'Lean. 

Of this ammoniated water, he drank daily 
from 2 to 5 pounds, using castor oil when 
necessary. 

On the 24th his urine amounted to 8 
pounds only, and was almost natural. Next 
day it was 14 pounds, and varied from 10 
to 13 pounds, being sometimes more, some- 
times less sweet, till January 31st, when my 
attendance at the Hospital having ceased, 
Dr. Millar took charge of this patient also. 
The following reports will shew the effects 
of the medicine, &c. 

February 5th. 

Urine 13 pounds, still sweetish; 2 pounds 
of ammoniated water. Has head-ach and 
giddiness, more or less severe, according to 
|P_51
the quantity of ammoniated water that he 
drinks. 

6th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; urine 14 
pounds, still sweetish. 

To drink a pound of lime-water daily. 

7th. 

From the 22d to the 30th of January, 
each pound of water contained 5 drops of 
amm. hep. from the 30th of January to this 
day, each contained 6 drops. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; urine 12 
pounds, not so sweet; thirst abated by the 
lime-water. To-day weak; appetite bad; 
skin warm; pulse natural; no stool since 
the 5th to have the castor oil immediately. 

8th. 

Ammoniated water 3 pounds; urine 71/2
pounds, still sweet; head confused and un- 
easy. 

|P_52
In this state he continued until the 11th. 

Ammoniated water 11/2 pound; lime-wa- 
ter 1 pound; urine 81/2 pounds, more like 
natural urine in taste, smell, and appear- 
ance. 

12th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; no lime- 
water; urine 9 pounds, sweeter. For some 
days has been squeamish, with little appe- 
tite, and a tendency to diarrhœa. Together 
with the usual medicines he was ordered to 
take thrice a day, two ounces of infusion of 
quassi, and a little tincture of rhubarb. 

13th. 

Ammoniated water 2 pounds; urine 9 
pounds; appetite better. 

16th. 

Squeamish in the morning. Ammoniated 
water 31/2 pounds; urine 91/2 pounds, not so 
sweet. To have 8 drops of the hepatised 
ammonia to each pound of water. 

|P_53
17th, 18th and 19th. 

Took daily of the ammoniated water from 
2 to 3 pounds; urine 8 or 9 pounds, less 
sweet. Five drops of the hepatised ammo- 
nia, mixed with a little water, were ordered 
every two hours. The urine never fell be- 
low 8 pounds a-day; the sweetness dimi- 
nished, but never ceased entirely. 

March 5th. 

He was ordered to take 50 drops of the 
hepatised ammonia daily. Urine 81/2 pounds. 

The next morning he was seized with 
griping and purging. The medicine was 
omitted, and he was directed to use an 
astringent with opium, if the purging or 
pain should become excessive: the astrin- 
gent, however, was not needed. 

13th. 

Ammonia hepatisata 60 drops; drink 4 
pounds; urine 9 pounds. 

|P_54
In order to ascertain the effect of volatile 
alkali without hepatic gas, the former me- 
dicine was omitted, and 20 drops of the 
pure water of ammonia were ordered to be 
taken thrice a day in beef tea. It was gra- 
dually increased to 120 drops. The urine 
continued from 9 to 91/2 pounds, never en- 
tirely free from sugar, but more so than for- 
merly. 

25th. 

Drink 21/2 pounds. Aq. ammon. puræ 
gt. 120. Frequent vomiting. Urine ra- 
ther increased, very sweet, and of a morbid 
smell. 

The medicines were omitted, and he was 
directed to take half a grain of opium im- 
mediately, and the same quantity when the 
sickness or vomiting returned, until he had 
taken 2 grains. 

26th. 

The sickness abated without opium; urine 
91/2 pounds; medicines still omitted. For 
|P_55
some days he used no medicine, except a 
quantity of lime-water for drink; and there 
was no change in the urine. 

30th. 

Drink 31/2 pounds; urine 8 pounds; a feel- 
ing of weakness, and lassitude in the region 
of the kidneys—a small blister was applied 
over each kidney. 

31st. 

Sweated much during the night. Says 
he is less troubled than usual with enuresis. 
Pulse about 115. Drink 4 pounds; urine 
9 pounds, of unnatural smell, but not sweet. 

April 3d. 

Issues by means of caustic were ordered 
to be formed over each kidney. He was 
directed to drink sparingly, and chiefly 
lime-water, and his diet was regulated with 
more care. For it was found, that all along 
he had used a great proportion of vegetables 
for food, and had been guilty of irregularity 
also in drinking. He was ordered to get no 
|P_56
vegetables; however he was allowed one roll 
a day; the rest of his diet consisted of soup, 
blood-puddings, and butcher meat roasted, 
or boiled as he chose. 

5th. 

Drink 5 pounds (3 of which lime-water); 
urine 81/2 pounds, free from sugar, of a bit- 
terish taste, but unnatural smell. Had vio- 
lent head-ach last night (from the issues he 
thinks), but is easy to-day. 

7th. 

This morning had nausea, heart-burn, 
and head-ach, which are now gone. Drink 
4 pounds (11/2 of which lime-water); urine 
hardly 8 pounds, almost natural. He was 
desired to take a scruple of ipecacuan, and 
after the vomiting a grain of opium. 

8th. 

What he vomited yesterday had a sweet 
taste, belly bound; was giddy this morn- 
ing; pulse 100; drink about 8 pounds (no 
lime water); urine 6 pounds, of more na- 
|P_57
tural smell, but less salt than yesterday. To 
have immediately 15 grains of jalap, with 
8 of cinnamon. 

9th and 10th. 

The jalap did not move him, and he had 
only one costive stool after an ounce of cas- 
tor oil. Thirst much abated; urine from 5 
to 6 pounds a day, nearly natural. Ordered 
an ounce of castor oil, and one of tincture 
of jalap; one half to be taken instantly, 
and the other after three hours. 

11th. 

Three stools. Feels himself stronger, and 
in better spirits. Pulse 80. Drink 3 pounds 
(no lime-water); urine 61/2 pounds, nearly 
natural. 

12th, 13th and 14th. 

Thirst abated; urine from 6 to 7 pounds, 
of natural taste and smell, when evaporated 
it yielded no sugar. Thus he continued free 
from thirst, though his mouth was parched 
and dry during the night; he gained strength 
|P_58
and flesh; his urine never exceeded 61/2 pounds, 
and seemed perfectly natural till the 

30th. 

When it again became sweet; having 
been strictly questioned, he confessed that 
he drank a quantity of small beer yesterday 
afternoon, and we have found that he has 
committed several other irregularities. 

May 1st. 

Urine again natural. This day he left the 
Infirmary, having promised to persist in the 
use of animal food, and to retum if he should 
relapse. He is gone to Irvine, about 30 miles 
distant, and nothing has been heard of him 
since. 

These patients were examined daily in 
the Royal Infirmary of Glasgow, and the re- 
ports were dictated before the Students, of 
whom many examined very scrupulously the 
changes of the urine, and all other circum- 
stances respecting a disease to which their 
attention was strongly attracted both by the 
|P_59
novelty of the treatment, and their having 
seen a case which ended fatally not long 
ago. In copying the reports I have omitted 
every circumstance that seemed unessential, 
and I have abridged the language so far as 
I thought consistent with perspicuity. I 
have dropped the Latin form of prescribing, 
though it gave me some trouble to express 
the prescriptions shortly in English (and 
many of them look awkward enough), be- 
cause I was desirous of making the cases in- 
telligible to those who do not practise phy- 
sic, as I hope this very interesting inquiry 
will soon excite the attention of the public. 

After stripping the cases of every neces- 
sary detail, I shall not load them with many 
additional remarks. They seem to me very strong 
confirmations of your doctrine, in every point, 
except what regards the hepatised ammonia. 
At first perhaps it was not properly prepared, 
after a little while, however, it was; and it 
seemed to have very little power over the 
urine. In one patient (but he was querulous 
and fanciful), it seemed to affect the head; 
|P_60
in the other, it seemed to act like common 
volatile alkali, by producing an agreeable 
sensation of warmth in the stomach. Our 
patients, indeed, were in many respects dif- 
ferent from yours; and it is very common 
to find the operation of medicines strangely 
modified by the varying habits and suscepti- 
bilities of patients. 

The alum whey (formed by boiling a 
drachm of alum in a pint of milk) seemed 
to produce considerable effect, at least in re- 
ducing the quantity of urine. The castor 
oil appears to be the most useful laxative; 
but no medicine was of any permanent ad- 
vantage without the aid of animal food. 
This is more powerful than any medicine, 
and very probably this alone, properly ma- 
naged, may be found sufficient for the cure 
in many cases. 

Whether the cure in our two patients be 
complete or not, is a question which I shall 
not labour to decide by argument. For my 
own part I think they are cured, though 
|P_61
they may never perhaps be so strong as they 
were, and both may probably relapse; be- 
cause, being poor, they are exposed to the 
double risk of severe labour, and improper 
food. Besides, on many other occasions, a 
tendency to relapse is not considered as a 
proof of imperfect cure. Is an intermittent 
not cured, because one who has had it this 
spring, will be found very subject to it next 
season, if he shall be exposed to the cause 
which commonly produces it? 

Glasgow, May 22, 1797. 

I COULD not see the gentleman 
who prepared our hepatised ammonia till 
this day, and from his account I imagine 
your conjecture is well founded. Ours was 
very different from your preparation. Some 
of the hepatic gas was procured by pouring 
marine acid on sulphur and iron filings 
merely rubbed together: but the greater 
part was obtained from the iron and sulphur 
melted together in a crucible and then pow- 
dered. In both cases, the smell and taste of 
|P_62
the volatile alkali continued very strong. I 
am satisfied, therefore, that no inference re- 
specting the real effect or activity of this 
preparation can be drawn from our experi- 
ments. 

The diabetic patient who died, was not 
opened. She died at home, and was buried 
very soon, and secretly, in order to prevent 
all application. 

Since the cases were transmitted to you, 
John Roger has returned from Irvine. He 
continues well, but has a greater appetite 
than usual. His urine is salt, and in a na- 
tural quantity. He is able to work. 

[}From ******, ********. }]
Mr. Ashley Cooper, at St. Thomas's 
Hospital, having mentioned in one of his 
anatomical demonstrations our views of the na- 
ture of diabetic disease, a young gentleman pre- 
sent, who had a relation in the country with 
|P_63
the complaint, expressed a wish to be more par- 
ticularly informed, and was referred to us. 
He gave a concise account of the Patient; and 
it was suggested, as the Patient was so far ad- 
vanced in life, an immediate application of our 
treatment to its whole extent might not be ad- 
viseable, the gradual adoption of it was there- 
fore recommended. As the Patient, however, 
had been a Physician of long practice, though 
now retired, and being immediately under the 
charge of a respectable Physician in extensive 
business, we requested our opinion generally 
might be conveyed along with the printed notes 
of Captain Meredith's case. This was on the 
19th March, 1797. The following account, 
written by the Patient himself, we received on 
the 18th May, being only a period of two 
months. 

Guy's Hospital, 18th May, 1797. 

Sir, 

THE inclosed account is drawn up 
by my friend the patient himself. I think 
it incumbent on me to return my best 
thanks for your kind and ready advice, from 
|P_64
which the patient has derived so much ad- 
vantage. 

I am, Sir, 
yours, &c. 
G. B. 

Dr. Rollo may make what use he 
pleases of the under described case, provided 
he does not insert the name of the Patient, 
or that of his Physician. 

A gentleman far advanced in life, being 
now in his 77th year, and during greatest 
part of that time in pretty uniform good 
health, except some attacks of Erysipelas 
about mid-age, and latterly a chronic rheu- 
matism in the loins, occasioning more of 
stiffness than pain. He was accustomed to 
live after the common mode of sober per- 
sons, or if prone to any excess, it was chiefly 
in the use of sugar. He began about two 
years ago to feel a great increase of general 
debility, to which was soon adjoined an un- 
usual frequency of discharge by the bladder, 
amounting on the whole to rather more 
|P_65
than one third of the liquor taken in, and 
it was voided with a forcing kind of pain, 
both at the commencement and close of 
the emission; made mostly in small quanti- 
ties at a time. These calls became soon so 
multiplied in the night as greatly to disturb 
natural rest; and the mouth and fauces grew 
so dry as to oblige the patient to keep small 
pebbles rolling continually in the mouth 
during the day time. The inspissation of 
the saliva was such as to make it difficult 
to spit out, unless previously diluted. The 
hands shook to such a degree that rendered 
it dangerous to shave, and hardly possible to 
write legibly, while the lower limbs felt as 
if scarce able to support the trunk of the 
body; the feet and ancles swelled consider- 
ably; the thirst was intense, but there was 
very little shew of fever by the pulse. 

Under these circumstances the opinion of 
an eminent Physician in the neighbourhood 
was asked, who recommended lime-water, 
earth of alum, afterwards pills of catechu, 
alum, and a small portion of vitriolated zinc. 
|P_66
By these remedies the forcing at the neck 
of the bladder was a good deal relieved; 
but the very distressing dryness of the mouth 
and fauces still continued, and was by no- 
thing so much solaced, as by moistening 
with milk and water. The urine remained, 
as it had always been, well coloured, frothy 
upon first emission, and favouring strongly 
of that sweetness, to scent and taste, charac- 
teristic of diabetic urine. 

Upon receiving from a young friend, pu- 
pil at the Hospitals in Southwark, Dr. 
Rollo's notes on a case of this sort, the Pa- 
tient and his Physician agreed to avail them- 
selves of his plan of treatment, with some 
accommodation to the circumstances of the 
individual, and they have found reason to 
be satisfied with the adoption of it. 

Vegetable articles of diet had been long 
discarded; and the use of pure sugar, since 
the excellent hints in that communication, 
had been entirely laid aside. Rancid fats 
and putrescent flesh could not be admitted 
|P_67
even in idea, without inducing nausea: in- 
stead of these were employed fresh mutton, 
animal gluten, mucilage, &c. At breakfast 
he takes milk, with some cocoa, or choco- 
late; for supper, calves feet jelly with milk, 
and sometimes an addition of sweet al- 
monds. A moderate allowance of wine has 
been continued, as indispensibly necessary 
for support; but the least acid foreign wines 
have been used, and a gradual reduction is 
making in this hitherto necessary indul- 
gence. Of medicines, the saturated solution 
of soda, and Schweppe's soda water, have 
been only employed: from the last there is 
every reason to believe a share of the amend- 
ment may be attributed. See Dr. Falconer's 
letter to us, where he points out the mephitic 
alkaline water as likely to be of advantage in 
this disease.


The urine does not now considerably ex- 
ceed the liquid taken in. In the day time 
it is voided frequently, but without pain; 
the night calls are diminished to one, very 
rarely two occur. Its colour is good, and 
|P_68
its sweetness can hardly be said to be per- 
ceptible. The excessive dryness of the mouth 
and fauces, that depraved the taste for any 
aliment, particularly bread, and in conse- 
quence impaired the appetite, is nearly re- 
moved. The feet and ancles swell a lit- 
tle at times, which may be in some mea- 
sure owing to the large proportion of the 
νυχθημερον, during which, though the days 
are so long, yet the patient is unrecumbent 
sixteen or seventeen hours at least. 

With this hasty sketch you will please 
present my best compliments and thanks to 
Dr. Rollo. 

[}From Dr. Gerard, Liverpool. }]
The following case is that mentioned in Dr. 
Currie's letter to us, and we communicate it 
with the greatest pleasure to the public, as be- 
ing drawn up with the utmost accuracy, and 
containing details of procedure of the utmost im- 
portance towards perfecting our views of the 
|P_69
nature and treatment of the disease, and of 
confirming them. 

[}THE CASE. }]
John Clarke, aged 38, was received 
into the Liverpool Infirmary under 
Diabetes, on the 9th February, 1797. 

He was a soldier in Lord Darlington's 
Light Horse when they were reduced in 
February, 1796. 

At that time he was in good health; 
thinks he might then have weighed about 
140 pounds in his clothes; he is 5 feet 71/2
inches in height; has dark hair and grey 
eyes. He always enjoyed good health, but 
was subject to Pyrosis, and accustomed to 
perspire much. Happening to reside near 
the sea coast, he has from a boy been used 
to bathe frequently during the summer 
months, not for any indisposition, but 
merely for gratification; sometimes he went 
|P_70
into the water twice the same day, and staid 
in it 10 or 15 minutes; being always of a 
costive habit, he also drank of the water oc- 
casionally. He discontinued the practice of 
bathing, however, whilst the weather still 
continued warm, as early, he thinks, as the 
beginning of August; his habitual perspira- 
tion lessened afterwards by degrees, and he 
continued in good health till about the end 
of November, 1796, when the perspiration 
entirely ceased, and the cuticle became un- 
naturally dry, harsh, and rough, and is now 
to all appearance dead, and incapable either 
of perspiration or absorption, or any kind of 
transmission. About this time some head- 
ach also came on, and the bowels became 
in general more costive, though he was 
sometimes troubled with a lax for a few 
days. 

With the preceding symptoms he was af- 
flicted with a most distressing thirst, which 
was not to be satisfied. His appetite was 
increased, and yet he lost flesh daily, and 
grew weaker very fast, particularly in the 
|P_71
thighs and small of the back, attended with 
pain in the region of the kidneys. He also 
observed, that he made much more urine 
than usual, and that the quantity increased 
from day to day. 

It should be remembered, that having no 
other means of getting here, he was under 
the necessity of walking from 5 to 8 miles 
each day, for 3 successive days, before he 
reached Liverpool; but this was a whole 
day's work, and a great fatigue to him. 

Considering this to be a case, that from 
all former experience might almost be 
deemed incurable, I wished to consult my 
Colleagues, Dr. Brandreth and Dr. Cur- 
rie; therefore I only ordered him a dose of 
castor oil, to remove the costive state of the 
body. 

Those gentlemen saw him with me on 
the 11th February. At this time Dr. Currie
had just received a publication from Dr. 
|P_72
Rollo, Surgeon General to the Royal Artillery, 
at Woolwich, of a case of Diabetes that he 
had treated with success; he had not read 
it; but he understood that much was attri- 
buted to animal diet. 

On this authority our patient was ordered 
to live chiefly on flesh and milk; he was 
also directed to use the warm bath, and 
with a view of ascertaining whether the 
generally received opinion that absorption 
takes place in this disease be true, he was 
desired to be weighed naked, both before 
he went into it, and upon coming out. Dr. 
Currie had observed in a case of a different 
nature, that no absorption took place in the 
warm bath. The pulse to be counted; and 
the heat of the body ascertained by placing 
a thermometer under the tongue, and to 
note the whole down. 

February 12th. 

He went into the bath for the first time, 
when 
|P_73
The pulse was, 
before bathing, 75, after it, 85. 
Heat of the body 91, — 95. 
Weight of body 112lb. 4oz. — 112lb. 6oz. 

He continued in the bath 12 minutes, 
which having been as high as 116 degrees 
of Fahr. may have acted as a stimulus suffi- 
cient both to quicken the pulse and increase 
the heat. The 2 ounces he appears to have 
gained after having bathed, is not to be at- 
tributed to absorption, but to water remain- 
ing amongst the hair, and adhering to the 
body; for he had unintentionally been over 
the head, and the body had not been wiped 
dry. 

