

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. I. }]
[}Narrative of Dr. Wright. }]
In the London Medical Journal for the year 1786, 
Dr. William Wright, [/1./] formerly of the island of 
Jamaica, gave an account of the successful treat- 
ment of some cases of fever by the ablution of the 
patient with cold water. 

"On the 1st of August, 1777, " says Dr. 
Wright, I embarked in a ship bound to Liver- 
pool, and sailed the same evening from Montego 
Bay. The master told me he had hired several 
sailors on the lame day we took our departure; 
one one of whom had been at sick quarters on shore, 
and was now but in a convalescent state. On the 
23d of August, we were in the latitude of Bermudas, 
and had had a very heavy gale of wind for three 
days, when the above-mentioned man relapsed, 
|P_2
and had a fever with symptoms of the greatest 
malignity. I attended this person often, but could 
not prevail with him to be removed from a dark 
and confined situation to a more airy and conve- 
nient part of the ship; and as he refused medicines, 
and even food, he died on the eighth day of his 
illness. 

By my attention to the sick man I caught the 
contagion, and began to be indisposed on the 5th 
of September, and the following is a narrative of 
my case, extracted from notes daily marked down: 
I had been many years in Jamaica, but, except 
being somewhat relaxed by the climate, and fatigue 
of business, I ailed nothing when I embarked. 
This circumstance, however, might perhaps dis- 
pose me more readily to receive the infection. 

Sept. 5th, 6th, 7th, small rigors now and 
then — a preternatural heat of the skin — a dull 
pain in the forehead — the pulse small and quick — 
a loss of appetite, but no sickness at stomach — the 
tongue white and slimy — little or no thirst — the 
belly regular — the urine pale and rather scanty — 
in the night restless, with starting and delirium. 

Sept. 8th, every symptom aggravated, with 
pains in the loins and lower limbs, and stiffness in 
the thighs and hams. 

|P_3
I took a gentle vomit in the second day of 
this illness, and next morning a decoction of tama- 
rinds; at bed-time, an opiate, joined with antimo- 
nial wine, but this did not procure sleep, or open the 
pores of the skin. No inflammatory symptoms 
being present, a drachm of Peruvian bark was taken 
every hour for six hours successively, and now and 
then a glass of port wine, but with no apparent 
benefit. When upon deck, my pains were greatly 
mitigated, and the colder the air the better. This 
circumstance, and the failure of every means I had 
tried, encouraged me to put in practice on myself 
what I had often wished to try on others, in fevers 
similar to my own. 

Sept. 9th, Having given the necessary directi- 
ons, about three o'clock in the afternoon I stripped 
off all my cloaths, and threw a sea-cloak loosely 
about me till I got upon the deck, when the cloak 
also was laid aside: Three buckets full of salt water 
were then thrown at once on me, the shock was 
great, but I felt immediate relief. The head-ach 
and and other pains instantly abated, and a fine glow 
and diaphoresis succeeded. Towards evening, how- 
ever, the febrile symptoms threatened a return, and 
I had again recourse to the same method as before, 
with the same good effect. I now took food with 
an appetite, and for the first time had a sound 
night's rest. 

|P_4
Sept. 10th, no fever, but a little uneasiness in 
the hams and thighs — used the cold bath twice. 

Sept. 11th, every symptom vanished, but to 
prevent a relapse, I used the cold bath twice. 

"Mr. Thomas Kirk, a young gentleman, pas- 
senger in the same ship, fell sick of a fever on the 
9th of August. His symptoms were nearly similar 
to mine, and having taken some medicines with- 
out experiencing relief, he was desirous of trying 
the cold-bath, which with my approbation, he did 
on the 11th and 12th of September, and, by this 
method, was happily restored to health. He lives 
at this time (Jan. 1786) near Liverpool. "

To this interesting narrative, Dr. Wright adds 
some general observations on the traces that are to 
be found of the use of cold water internally and 
externally in fevers, in several works ancient and 
modern. But whether he himself pursued this 
practice any farther, I have not been informed. 

Having before experienced that Dr. Wright was 
a safe guide, [/2./] I immediately on reading this narra- 
tive determined on following his practice in the 
present instance; and before an opportunity occur- 
|P_5
red of carrying my intention into effect, I was 
farther encouraged, by learning that my respectable 
colleague Dr. Brandreth, had employed cold water 
externally in some recent cases of fever with 
happy effects. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CHAP. II. }]
[}History of a fever which broke out in the Liverpool 
Infirmary. }]
[}}]
In the 9th of Dec. 1787, a contagious fever made 
its appearance in the Liverpool Infirmary. For 
some time previoufly the weather had been ex- 
tremely cold, and the discipline of the house, owing 
to causes which it is unnecessary to mention, had 
been much relaxed. The intensity of the cold pre- 
vented the necessary degree of ventilation, and the 
regulations for the preservation of cleanliness had 
been in some measure neglected. These circum- 
stances operated particularly on one of the wards 
of the eastern wing, employed as a lock-hospital for 
females, where the contagion first appeared. The 
|P_6
fever spread rapidly, and before its progress could 
be arrested, sixteen persons were affected, of which 
two died. — Of these sixteen, eight were under my 
care. On this occasion I used for the first time the 
affusion of cold water, in the manner described by 
Dr. Wright. It was first tried in two cases only, 
the the one in the second, the other in the fourth day 
of fever. The effects corresponded exactly with 
those mentioned by him to have occurred in his 
own case; and thus encouraged, the remedy was 
employed in five other cases. It was repeated daily, 
and of these seven patients, the whole recovered. 
In the eighth case, the aspersion of cold water seemed 
too hazardous a practice, and it was not employed. 
The strength of the patient was much impaired by 
lues, and at the time of catching the contagion, she 
laboured under ptyalism. I was not then aware 
that this last circumstance, formed no objection 
against the cold affusion, and in a situation so cri- 
tical, it was thought imprudent to use it. The 
usual remedies were directed for this patient, par- 
ticularly, bark, wine, and opium, but unsuccess- 
fully; she died on the 16th day of her disease. 

From this time forth, I have constantly wished to 
employ the affusion of cold water in every case 
of the low contagious fever, in which the strength 
was not already much exhausted; and I have pre- 
served a register of a hundred and fisty three cases, 
|P_7
in which the cure was chiefly trusted to this reme- 
dy. Of these, ninety-four occurred in the hospital 
in the four years subsequent to the period already 
mentioned, twenty-seven in private practice, and 
thirty-two in the 30th regiment of foot, when quar- 
tered in Liverpool in the year 1792. Of late I 
have not thought it necessary to register all the 
cases in which this remedy has been employed. 
Having satisfied myself of its extraordinary efficacy, 
and of the precautions necessary in using it, I have 
found it the shorter method as well as the more 
instructive, to record the instances in which it has 
proved unsuccessful. To relate the whole of my ex- 
perience would be a tedious and an useless labour. 
I purpose to digest the results under a few distinct 
heads, supporting and illustrating each general pro- 
position by an ample detail of cases. Before, how- 
ever, this preliminary account is closed, it will be 
useful to enter more particularly into the history of 
the contagious fever which broke out in the 30th 
regiment, because the account of its rise, progress, 
treatment, and termination, will support in a striking 
manner the doctrines I wish to establish, and if I 
do not greatly deceive myself, may afford important 
instruction, as well as encouragement, to those whose 
duty may call them to oppose the progress of conta- 
gious fever in similar situations. 

|P_8
[}CHAP. III. }]
[}History of a Fever which occurred in the 30th 
Regiment. }]
The 30th Regiment, as is usual with troops in 
Liverpool, was billeted in the town, but paraded 
and mounted guard in the fort, situated north of 
the town, and on the banks of the river. The 
general guard room had been used previous to the 
arrival of the 30th, as a place of confinement for 
deserters; it was extremely close and dirty, and 
under it was a cellar, which in the winter had been 
full of water. This water was now half evaporated, 
and from the surface issued offensive exhalations. 

In a dark, narrow, and unvenrilated cell, off the 
guard-room, it was usual to confine such men as 
were sent to the guard for misbehaviour, and about 
the beginning of June, (1792) several men had 
been shut up in this place on account of drunken- 
ness, and suffered to remain there twenty-four hours, 
under the debility that succeeds intoxication. The 
|P_9
typhus, or jail fever, made its appearance in two 
of these mert about the first of the month, and 
spread with great rapidity. Ten of the soldiers 
labouring under this epidemic, were received into 
the Liverpool infirmary, and the wards allotted to 
fever could admit ho more. The contagion con- 
tinuing its progress, a temporary hospital was fitted 
up at the fort, and I was requested to give my 
assistance there to the surgeon of the regiment, 
by Captains Brereton [/3./] and Torriano. [/4./]

In two low rooms, each about fisteen feet square, 
were fourteen patients labouring under fever. 
They were in different stages of its progress: one 
was in the fourteenth day of the disease, two were 
in the twelfth, and the rest from the ninth to the 
fourth inclusive. The symptoms of the fever were 
very uniform. In every case there was more or 
less cough, with mucous expectoration: in all those 
who had sustained the disease eight days and 
upwards, there were petechiæ on the skin; in seve- 
ral there were occasional bleedings from the nostrils, 
and streaks of blood in the expectoration. The 
debility was considerable from the first, and this 
had been increased in several cases by the use of 
venesection, before the nature of the epidemic was 
|P_10
understood. The pulse varied from 130 strokes 
in the minute to 100; the heat rose in one case to 
105° of Fahrenheit, but was in general from 101° 
to 103°; and towards the latter stages of the disease 
it was scarcely above the temperature of health. 
Great pain in the head, with stupor pervaded the 
whole, and in several instances there occurred a 
considerable degree of the low delirium. 

Our first care was to ventilate and clean the 
rooms, which were in a high degree foul and pesti- 
lential. Our second was to wash and clean the 
patients themselves. This was done by pouring 
sea-water, in the manner already described, over the 
naked bodies of those whose strength was not 
greatly reduced, and whose heat was steadily above 
the temperature of health. In those advanced in the 
fever, whose debility was of course great, we did 
not venture on this treatment, but contented our- 
selves with spunging the whole surface of the body 
with tepid vinegar, a practice that in every stage 
of fever is salutary and refreshing. 

Our next care was to stop the progress of the 
infection. With this view, the guard-house was at 
first attempted to be purified by washing and venti- 
lation, the greatest part of its furniture having been 
burnt, or thrown into the sea. All our precautions 
and exertions of this kind were however found to 
|P_11
be ineffectual. The weather was at this time wet, 
and extremely cold for the season; the men on 
guard could not be prevailed on to remain in the 
open air; and from passing the night in the infected 
guard-room, several of the privates of the successive 
reliefs, on the 10th, 11th, and 12th of the month, 
caught the infection. — In several of these the fever 
ran through its course; and in others, it was im- 
mediately arrested by the affusion of sea-water as 
already described. No means having been found 
effectual for the purification of the guard-room, it 
was shut up, and a temporary shed erected in its 
stead. — Still the contagion proceeded; on the 
morning of the 13th three more having been added 
to the list of the infected. — On that day, therefore, 
the whole regiment was drawn up at my request, 
and the men examined in their ranks: Seventeen 
were found with symptoms of fever upon them. — 
It was not difficult to distinguish them as they stood 
by their fellows. — Their countenances were lan- 
guid, their whole appearance dejected, and the 
adnata of their eyes had a dull red suffusion. These 
men were carefully separated from the rest of the 
corps, and immediately subjected to the cold affu- 
sion, always repeated once, and sometimes twice a 
day. — In fifteen of the number the contagion was 
extinguished; but two went through the regular 
disease. On the same day, the commanding officer, 
at my desire, issued an order for the whole of the re- 
|P_12
maining part of the regiment to bathe in the sea; and 
for some time they were regularly mustered, and 
marched down at high water, to plunge into the tide. 

These means were successful in arresting the 
epidemic: after the 13th of June no person was 
attacked by it. It extended to fifty eight persons 
in all, of which thirty-two went through the regular 
course of the fever, and in twenty-six the disease 
seemed to be cut short by the cold affusion. Of 
thirty-two already mentioned, two died. Both of 
these were men whose constitutions were weakened 
by the climate of the West Indies; both of them 
had been bled in the early stages of the fever; and 
the one of them being in the twelfth, the other in the 
14th day of the disease when I first visited them, 
neither of them was subjected to the cold affusion. 
The water employed on this occasion was taken up 
from the river Mersey close by the fort. It was at 
that time of a temperature from 58° to 60° of 
Fahrenheit, and it contains in solution from a 32d 
to a 33d part of sea-salt. 

In hospitals, manufactories, and prisons—situations 
in which the low contagious fever so frequently origi- 
nates, the practice I have detailed may be followed 
with great ease, safety, and advantage; but it is in 
a more particular degree applicable to this conta- 
gion when it appears on ship-board, because in that 
|P_13
situation the usual means of prevention or cure are 
necessarily limited, and the imminence of the danger 
requires a remedy that operates with speed as well 
as efficacy. The waters of the ocean afford this 
remedy; in every point of view a most happy one 
for mariners, since it can be applied almost as easily 
as it can be procured. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CHAP. IV. }]
[}The manner in which the affusion of cold water ought to 
be used in Fever. }]
Having given this general account of my expe- 
rience of this remedy in fever, it will now be neces- 
sary to enter more particularly on the rules which 
ought to govern its application, and on the different 
effects to be expected from it, according to the dif- 
ferent stages of the disease in which it is employed. 
It will be proper to premise, that when the term fever 
is used in the present work without any adjunctive, 
it is the low contagious fever that is meant. This 
is the Typhus of Dr. Cullen; the contagious fever 
|P_14
of Dr. Lind; the Febris irritativus of Dr. Darwin. 
In popular language, it is generally called the ner- 
vous fever, and where particular symptoms appear, 
the putrid fever. It is usually produced in situa- 
tions where there is a want of cleanliness, and more 
especially of ventilation; and when produced, it is 
propagated by contagion. This is the common 
fever of England; its symptoms have been detailed 
with great minuteness in a variety of modern pub- 
lications, and I have therefore declined repeating 
descriptions that are every where to be met with. 
Dr. Cullen has defined the disease as follows — 
Morbus contagiosus; calor parum auctus; pulsus 
parvus, debilis, plerumque frequens; urina parum 
mutata; sensorii functiones plurimum turbatae; 
vires multum imminutae.  In sixteen years practice 
I have found the contagious fever of Liverpool re- 
markably uniform, and in general to correspond 
exactly with this concise and perspicuous definition. 
This disease prevails chiefly among the poor, who 
from the nature of their diet and habits, are pecu- 
liarly exposed to the causes that produce it. Seldom 
extending itself in any considerable degree among 
the other classes of the community, it has been sup- 
posed that Liverpool was little subject to fever; but 
this will be shewn, from authentic documents, to be 
a great and a pernicious error. Let us proceed at 
present to inquire into the rules that ought to 
|P_15
govern the use of the affusion or aspersion of cold 
water in this disease. 

Whoever has watched the progress of fever, must 
have observed the justness of the observation made 
by Cullen, Vogel, De Haen, and others, that even 
those genera which are denominated continued, 
are not strictly such, but have pretty regular and 
distinct exacerbations and remissions in each diurnal 
period. In this space of time, Dr. Cullen contends 
that an attentive observer may commonly distin- 
guish two separate paroxysms. [/5./] My observations 
do not enable me to confirm his position in its full 
extent — but one exacerbation, and one remission 
in the twenty-fours, seems generally observable. 
The exacerbation usually occurs in the afternoon, 
or evening, the remission towards morning. These 
exacerbations are marked by increased flushing, 
thirst, and restlessness. If the heat of the patient be, 
at such times, taken by the thermometer, it will 
be found to have risen one or two degrees in the 
central parts of the body, above the average heat 
of the fever, and still more on the extremities. — 
The safest and most advantageous time for using 
the aspersion or affusion of cold water, is when the 
exacerbation is at its height, or immediately after 
its declination is begun; and this has led me 
|P_16
almost always to direct it to be employed from six 
to nine o'clock in the evening; but it may be 
safely used at any time of the day, when there is no 
sense of chilliness present, when the heat of the surface is 
steadily above what is natural, and when there is no gene- 
ral or profuse perspiration. — These particulars are of 
the utmost importance. 

1. If the aspersion of cold water on the surface 
of the body be used during the cold stage of the 
paroxysm of fever, the respiration is nearly suspend- 
ed; the pulse becomes fluttering, feeble, and of an 
incalculable frequency; the surface and extremities 
become doubly cold and shrivelled, and the patient 
seems to struggle with the pangs of instant dissolu- 
tion. I have no doubt, from what I have observed, 
that in such circumstances, the repeated affusion of a 
few buckets of cold water would extinguish life. 
This remedy should therefore never be used when 
any considerable sense of chilliness is present, even 
though the thermometer, applied to the trunk of 
the body, should indicate a degree of heat greater 
than usual. 

2. Neither ought it to be used, when the heat 
measured by the thermometer is less than, or 
even only equal to the natural heat, though the 
patient should feel no degree of chilliness. This is 
sometimes the case towards the last stages of fever, 
|P_17
when the powers of life are too weak to sustain or 
react under, so powerful a stimulus. 

3. It is also necessary to abstain from the use of 
this remedy when the body is under profuse per- 
spirarion, and this caution is more important in pro- 
portion to the continuance of this perspiration. In 
the commencement of perspiration, especially if it 
has been brought on by violent exercise, the affusion 
of cold water on the naked body, or even immer- 
sion in the cold bath, may be hazarded with little 
risque, and sometimes may be resorted to with 
great benefit. After the perspiration has continued 
some time and flowed freely, especially if the body 
has remained at rest, either the affusion or immersion 
are attended with danger, even though the heat 
of the body at the moment of using them be 
greater than natural. — Perspiration is always a cool- 
ing process in itself, but in bed it is often prolonged 
by artificial means, and the body is prevented from 
cooling under it to the natural degree, by the load of 
heated clothes. When the heat has been thus arti- 
ficially kept up, a practitioner, judging by the in- 
formation of his thermometer only, may be led into 
error. In this situation, however, I have observed 
that the heat sinks rapidly on the exposure of the sur- 
face of the body even to the external air, and 
that the application of cold water, either by 
affusion or immersion, is accompanied by a loss of 
|P_18
heat and a deficiency of re-action, which are altoge- 
ther inconsistent with safety. — Each of these points 
will be illustrated more fully in the sequel. 

Under these restrictions the cold affusion may be 
used at any period of fever; but its effects will be 
more salutary in proportion as it is used more early. 
Its general effects will be more clearly illustrated by 
the following cases. They are a selection from a 
great number, the records of which have been pre- 
served, and which lead to the same results. They 
are so arranged as to exhibit the salutary effects of 
the affusion of cold water in the different stages of 
fever, and illustrate the precautions laid down 
against using it improperly. If they should appear 
tedious after what has already been mentioned, this 
must be forgiven; on a subject so important and so 
little understood, it is better to incur the charge of 
tediousness than the hazard of being obscure. 

[}CHAP. V. }][^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE 1. }]
[}Cases in which the Affusion of Cold Water was used in 
the different stages of fever. 
January I, 1790. }]
A Nurse in the fever ward of the Infirmary having 
several patients under her care, caught the infection. 
She was seized with violent rigors, chilliness, and 
wandering pains, succeeded by great heat, thirst, 
and head-ach. Sixteen hours after the first attack, 
her heat at the axilla was 103° of Fah. her pulse 
112 in the minute and strong; her thirst great, her 
tongue furred, and her skin dry. 

Five gallons of salt water, of the temperature of 
44°, were poured over her naked body, and after 
being hastily dried with towels, she was replaced in 
bed: when the agitation and sobbing had subsided, 
her pulse was found to beat at the rate of 96 strokes 
in the minute, and in half an hour afterwards it 
|P_20
had fallen to 80. The heat was reduced to 98° 
by the ablution, and half an hour afterwards it 
remained stationary: The sense of heat and the 
head-ach were gone, and the thirst nearly gone. 
Six hours afterwards she was found perfectly free of 
fever, but a good deal of debility remained. 

Small doses of colombo were ordered for her with 
a light nourishing diet, and for several days the 
cold affusion was repeated at the same hour of the 
day; the fever never returned. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
During the progress of fever when epidemic, 
a great number of cases similar to the above have 
occurred, in which the disease was suddenly cut 
short by the use of the cold affusion on the first and 
second day; twenty six of these cases were in the 
30th regiment, as has already been stated. In 
such instances, the result was so precisely similar to 
what occurred in the case 1 have related, that it 
would be to no purpose to detail them. 

When an epidemic fever is spreading, and the 
danger is known, patients will take the alarm on 
the first attack, and the power, as well as the utility 
of such a remedy, as the cold affusion, in such situa- 
tions of general danger, will be easily imagined. — 
It cannot be employed too soon after the first at- 
|P_21
tack, provided the original chill is over, and the 
hot stage is firmly established. 

In cases in which the affusion was not employed 
till the third day of fever, I have seen several in- 
stances of the same complete solution of the disease. 
I have even seen this take place, when the remedy 
has been deferred till the fourth day; but this is not 
common. — The following case will point out the 
usual effects of this remedy in the third and fourth 
days of the disease. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE II. }]
Jan. 17, 1790. A. B. aged nineteen, a pupil of 
the Infirmary, caught the infection in attending the 
fever-ward. When I saw him, seventy-eight hours 
had elapsed since the first attack: he was of course 
in the fourth day of the disease. He had all the 
usual symptoms — head-ach, thirst, furred tongue, 
pain in the back and loins, with great debility. His 
heat was 101°, and his pulse 112 in the minute. 

A bucket full of salt water was poured over him 
as usual at noon on the 17th. His heat sunk to 
99°, and his pulse to 98 in the minute. A profuse 
perspiration followed, with the cessation of all his 
feverish symptoms. — This intermission continued 
for several hours, during which he enjoyed some 
|P_22
comfortable sleep: but at five in the afternoon he 
was again seized with feverish rigors, followed by 
heat, thirst, and head-ach, as before. An hour after- 
wards, the hot stage was established; his heat was 
100°, his pulse 100. The same quantity of cold 
water was again poured over him, and with similar 
effects. His pulse fell immediately to 80, and be- 
came more full, his heat became natural. The 
following night he took twenty drops of laudanum 
and slept well. 

On the 18th at noon his pulse was 96 and soft; 
his skin moist, but a little above the natural heat. 
His tongue was a little furred, and his head ached: 
he also complained of thirst; the heat at the axilla 
was 100°. — The same remedy was again applied. 
He was greatly refreshed by it. The pulse fell to 
90, the skin became cool, the thirst went off, and 
all the feverish symptoms vanished. 

On the 19th his pulse was 88, his heat natural, 
the thirst and head-ach were gone, and his appetite 
improving. The ablution was repeated for the last 
time at the same hour of the evening. 

On the 20th his pulse was 78 and soft, his tongue 
clean, and his appetite farther improved. He 
had still some remains of debility on the 21st, but 
on the 22d he was free of complaint. This patient 
|P_23
during his fever took no medicine but the efferves- 
cing mixture, the dose of laudanum excepted. — The 
affusion was used four times. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE III. }]
Dec. 8, 1791. A woman aged fisty-seven, who 
had caught the infection, in her attendance on a 
poor family labouring under fever, came under my 
care in the hospital, fisty hours after the first attack. 
She was of course in the third day of fever; she had 
the usual symptoms — head-ach, pain in the back 
and loins, and thirst: her tongue was furred and 
her eyes heavy: her pulse 96, her heat 101°. 
The affusion of cold water was performed at noon 
as usual. In a few minutes afterwards, the heat 
under the tongue was 98°, the pulse 80. Towards 
evening however, the feverish rigor returned, with 
all the usual consequences. As soon as the hot 
stage was established, the affusion was repeated, 
and with the usual happy effects. 

Dec. 9. — Noon — pulse, 90 and feeble — respirati- 
on easy — heat 100°. — The affusion was immediately 
employed, and again repeated in the evening — pers- 
piration, coolness, quiet, and sleep, were the 
consequence. 

Dec. 10. This day the affusion was twice re- 
|P_24
peated as yesterday, viz. at noon, and at six in the 
evening. — At eight in the evening the pulse was 
76, the skin soft, the heat 97°, the respiration easy 
and natural. — The fever returned no more. This 
patient used no other remedies but an enema and 
after it an opiate, every night. The affusion was 
used twice every day, in all six times. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE IV. }]
Feb. 2. 1792. S. C. a healthy man, aged forty- 
four, about seventy-two hours after the first attack 
of fever, became my patient. His pulse 100 — his 
heat 104°. — The other symptoms as usual — but 
the pain in the head and back particularly severe. 
Two minutes after the affusion — pulse 90, heat 
101°; six minutes after — pulse 90 and weak — ten 
minutes after, pulse 90, heat 100°. — This patient 
felt great refreshment, and was entirely relieved of the 
pain in the head and back. — In the evening however 
the exacerbation of fever was severe, and the head- 
ach returned with violence. — He passed a restless 
night. About four o'clock in the ensuing morning 
the affusion was repeated by his own desire. At 9, 
a. m. a general and gentle perspiration covered the 
surface of the body; the pulse was 84, the tongue 
moist, the skin cool, and the pains of the head and 
back entirely gone off. In the afternoon, however, 
the fever returned, though in a slighter degree. 
|P_24
The affusion was repeated the fourth time with 
the same happy effects, and after this he had no 
return of the disease. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
Thus it appears, that the cold affusion used on 
the third and fourth days of fever, does not usually 
produce an immediate solution of the disease; 
but that it instantly abates it, and by a few repe- 
titions brings it to a happy termination in two or 
three days. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE V. }]
Oct. 25. M. S. came under my care on the 
24th Dec. 1791, on the seventh day of typhus, 
with the usual symptoms — pulse 108, heat 100°. — 
The cold affusion was immediately directed — two 
minutes afterwards the heat was 96° —three mi- 
nutes afterwards 98° — the pulse 98. This patient 
experienced great relief. The affusion was repeated 
on this and the following day — a gentle diaphoresis 
always succeeded it, with tranquil sleep, and on the 
third day the fever was completely removed. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE VI. }]
A young lady of 19, in the 7th or 8th day of ty- 
phus, became my patient, Sept. 26, 1794. Her pulse 
was 112 and feeble, heat 101°. She had great 
|P_26
pain in the head, and much prostration of strength 
— her eyes were suffused and dull — her tongue 
furred — her spirits greatly depressed. Saline me- 
dicines were used for this patient, with lemonade 
for her usual drink, and moderate quantities of 
wine were given mixed with water. The burning 
sensation in the palms of her hands and temples 
was assuaged by frequent spunging with vinegar, 
and every evening at six, p. m. three or four gallons 
of cold brine were thrown over her. The happy 
effects so frequently described, were in this case 
particularly striking: — The pulse fell almost im- 
mediately to 90, the heat to its natural standard, 
and the head-ach vanished — a gentle diaphoresis 
followed, with easy sleep: — in a few hours, however, 
the feverish symptoms returned, and towards the 
hour of six in the evening the fever was as its highest 
state of exacerbation. At this hour therefore the 
affusion was repeated with the same happy effects — 
though the fever returned as before, it was in a 
milder form; the same practice was continued, 
and on the second of October, she was entirely free 
from the disease. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CASE VII. }]
F. G. a soldier of the 30th regiment, aged 33, 
fell under my care on the 9th June, 1792, during the 
prevalence of the epidemic in that regiment,of which 
|P_27
I have already given an account. He was in the 
9th day of the disease — his pulse 100 and feeble — 
his heat 104° — his thirst was very great—his tongue 
foul and black — frequent cough occurred, with 
streaks of blood in the expectoration—and petechiæ 
appeared all over his body. His mind was at all 
times confused, and occasionally he was completely 
delirious. I directed that his strength should be sup- 
ported by administering a bottle of wine every day, 
with an equal quantity of gruel ; — that every night 
he should take an opiate draught, and that a com- 
plete operation of his bowels should be procured 
by a clyster administered daily, and if this did not 
succeed, by a few grains of calomel. I also direct- 
ed that a bucket full of salt-water should be thrown 
over him immediately, and repeated according to 
circumstances. In a few minutes after the affusion, 
the heat was 98° — the pulse 98 — his mind was 
more calm and collected: two hours afterwards 
he had relapsed into nearly his former state, but 
the night was passed more tranquilly. The 
whole of this practice was continued, with nearly 
the same result, till the 12th day of the disease, the 
affusion having always been performed in the even- 
ing, and occasionally at noon. The fever conti- 
nued its usual period, but on the 12th day, the 
heat having sunk to its natural standard, the cold 
affusion was thenceforth omitted; we however, 
spunged the whole body once or twice a day with 
|P_28
vinegar. — The patient was in a state of conva- 
lescence on the 18th day from the first attack. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
I have related this case the more circumstantially, 
because it contains the particulars of my practice in 
the epidemic in which it occurred, at the same time 
that it affords an example of the effects of the cold 
affusion used in the more advanced periods of fever. 
In such instances, as might be expected, it does 
not procure the same advantages, as in the earlier 
stages, when the strength is less impaired, and the 
morbid actions less firmly associated; nevertheless, 
it is evidently advantageous while the heat of the 
patient exceeds the natural standard, though it 
ought to be employed with caution in the more 
advanced stages of the disease, and according 
to my later experience, of a temperature from 
fisteen to twenty degrees only, below the human 
heat. In the greater part of the cases that I have 
related, the water employed was the pump water 
of our hospital, saturated with sea-salt, and of a 
temperature from 40° to 50° of Fah'. 

The cold affusion may also be employed with 
success in intermittent fevers, as I have found by 
repeated trials, and as the following case will 
demonstrate. 

|P_29
[}CASE VIII. }]
Ann Hall, aged 22, was admitted into the Infir- 
mary, July 19, 1792, under an obstinate quotidian 
of three months standing — she had from time to 
time taken the bark, but as the great delicacy of 
her stomach, would not permit her to use it in suffi- 
cient quantities, she was become very feeble and 
much emaciated. A gentle emetic was admi- 
nistered to her in the first instance, and on the 
commencement of the hot stage of the paroxysm, 
twenty drops of the tincture of opium were directed, 
after the practice of Dr. Lind. During the intermis- 
sion, the bark was ordered to be taken in such doses as 
her stomach would bear; she was put on a nouris- 
hing diet, and was ordered a pint of port wine every 
day. This plan was pursued for fourteen days, but 
without success; the paroxysms returned daily, 
though with some irregularity — her strength was 
however rather improved. Still the delicacy of her 
stomach continued, and the bark, except in very 
small doses, was constantly rejected. 

On the 8th of August, two hours before the 
expected accession of the fever, four gallons of brine 
|P_30
were dashed over her, of the temperature of 66° of 
Fah'. and this day she escaped the attack. In the 
interval between this and the period of the next 
return, she took the bark in larger quantity, the 
tone of her stomach being improved; but on the 
10th, two hours later than usual, the paroxysm 
returned with unusual severity. After the hot stage 
was completely formed, the brine was poured over 
her, as before — the symptoms instantly abated; 
she fell into a gentle perspiration, with profound 
sleep. She afterwards continued the bark as before, 
and from this time forwards was free of disease. 

It would be easy to multiply these details, but 
their uniformity has already perhaps rendered them 
tedious; a few general observations therefore 
shall conclude this division of the subject. 

|P_31
[}CHAP. VI. }][^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}General Observations. }]
1. Though the patients were often startled at 
the first proposal of dashing the cold water over 
them, yet after one trial, there was seldom any 
difficulty in persuading them to have it repeated. 
The effects were in general highly grateful and re- 
freshing to their sensations, the extinction or abate- 
ment of fever was commonly followed by more 
or less diaphoresis, and this again by refreshing 
sleep. 

2. At first I used fresh water — afterwards fresh 
water mixed with vinegar — and lastly, a saturated 
solution of sea-salt in water. In the instance of 
the 30th regiment I used the water of the river, 
which contains about a thirty-third part of salt, as 
has been already mentioned, and this I com- 
|P_32
monly employ in private practice. [/6./] I was led to 
prefer salt-water to fresh, on account of the stimu- 
lating effect of sea-salt on the vessels of the skin, 
by which I apprehend the debilitating action of 
cold is prevented. Salt-water, either for the pur- 
pose of immersion or affusion, is more grateful to 
the patient than fresh water, and it is well known 
that it may be applied to the surface for a length of 
time, with much less hazard. The countenances 
of persons immersed in sea-water, and espe- 
cially in saturated brine, for some time toge- 
ther, preserve the lustre of the eye and the ruddi- 
ness of the cheek longer than those in fresh water, 
|P_33
of the same temperature, and such persons exhibit 
the vital re-action stronger when removed from it. 
I preferred the brine to vinegar, as being cheaper, 
and more easily procured of the necessary quantity: 
otherwise, it is well known how grateful vine- 
gar is to patients in fever, and perhaps a mixture 
of vinegar and water of the proper strength 
might be prepreferable even to brine. But though 
I gave the preference to brine over fresh water, 
I have very often used the last, and it is seldom 
that any danger can result from the want of a 
saline impregnation, where the cold is employ- 
ed in so stimulating a form as that which has 
been described, and for so temporary a duration. 

3. In taking the heat of the patient, I have gene- 
rally used a small mercurial thermometer of great 
sensibility, with a moveable scale, made for me by 
Mr. Ramsden, after a form invented by the late 
Mr. Hunter, and used by him in his experiments 
on the heat of animals, and I have introduced the 
bulb under the tongue with the lips close, or under 
the axilla indifferently; having found by repeated 
experiments, that the heat in these two places cor- 
responds exactly, and gives a just indication of the 
|P_34
heat of the surface of the body where sheltered by 
the necessary teguments, and secluded from the con- 
tact of the external air. 

Finding, however, considerable risque in using 
the straight tubed thermometer in contagious dis- 
eases, I got some instruments of this kind made with 
a small bulb curved at the end. The bulb being 
introduced under the tongue or the axilla, the ob- 
server can stand behind the patient, and mark the 
rise of the mercury, without coming into the imme- 
diate sphere of his respiration. 

|P_35
[}CHAP. IX. }]
[}Precautions requisite in using the cold affusion, illustrated 
with Cases. }]
1. It was before remarked, that the cold affusion 
cannot be used with safety during the cold stage of 
the febrile paroxysm: The following case will illus- 
trate this truth. In the summer of 1792 I was re- 
quested by Mr. Hoffman, an ingenious Prussian 
gentleman, and a surgeon in the army then under 
the command of the Duke of Brunswick, to give 
him an opportunity of seeing the method of using 
this remedy. At that time there was a patient la- 
bouring under a tertian intermittent under my care 
in the Infirmary, on whom it could with propriety 
be exhibited. Accordingly a time for meeting Mr. 
Hoffman in the fever-ward was appointed, when 
the hot stage of the paroxysm might be expected 
to be fairly formed. It happened however that the 
accession of the fever had occurred an hour later this 
day than might have been expected, and when we 
arrived, the patient was still in the cold stage of the 
paroxysm; the assistants however proceeded: he was 
|P_36
taken out of his bed shivering, his pulse small and 
frequent, his extremities shrunk and cold. In this 
state the brine was dashed over him as usual, but 
not with the usual happy effects: — his breathing 
was for some minutes almost suspended; his pulse 
at the wrist was not to be felt; the pulsations of 
the heart were feeble and fluttering; a deadly cold- 
ness spread over the surface; and when respiration 
returned, it was short, irregular, and laborious. — 
After the use of frictions on the surface, and parti- 
cularly on the extremities — of a steady warmth ap- 
plied for some time to the scrobiculus cordis — and of 
cordials cautiously administered in small quantities — 
the pulse at the wrist returned; but for some time 
it was excessively quick and feeble. He recovered 
however in the course of an hour, and it was found 
that the paroxysm of fever had been extinguished: 
but the circumstances first related were evidently 
full of danger, and they produced at the time much 
apprehension and uneasiness. The same remedy 
was however used in the hot stage of the ensuing 
paroxysm, and with the usual happy effects. — 
Other cases to the same purpose might be adduced 
if it were necessary. 

I have frequently used the cold affusion in the hot 
stage of the paroxysm of intermittents, and almost 
always with the immediate solution of the fit; but 
in general, if no remedy be used in the intermission, 
|P_37
the fever returns at the usual period. In some in- 
stances, however, the succeeding paroxysm has 
been prevented by using the cold affusion about an 
hour previous to the period of its expected return, 
and the disease been ultimately removed by conti- 
nuing this practice through four or five of the fol- 
lowing periods. 

The use of the cold affusion in the absence of 
fever, requires however a constitution in a great 
measure unbroken; and many of the intermittents 
which we see in Liverpool, being transmitted to us 
from the warm climates, adhere to constitutions in 
which this practice is not perfectly safe. In such 
cases, it may notwithstanding be adopted in the 
hot stage of fever with safety and advantage. In- 
deed it ought never to be forgotten, that an applica- 
tion of cold which is safe in the violence of fever, 
is not safe when the fever is removed. Injury has 
sometimes occurred from continuing the cold affu- 
sion in the period of convalescence. 

2. Neither is the cold affusion safe after the sweat- 
ing stage of fever has continued some time, and the 
body is passing through that cooling process. The 
following case will illustrate this position. In the 
summer of 1791, a boy of eight years of age, in 
whom I am peculiarly interested, was attacked by 
fever. On the third day his pulse rose to 130, 
|P_38
and 140 in the minute, and his heat to 106° and 
107° of Fah'. His thirst was very great, and de- 
lirium commenced on the second day, and conti- 
nued without intermission. Various methods had 
been employed to abate the fever, and particularly 
to excite perspiration, but unsuccessfully. His heat 
was not lessened by repeated spunging of the surface 
of the body with cold vinegar and water; and after 
a copious bleeding, all the symptoms were as alarm- 
ing as before. It seemed hazardous to repeat this 
evacuation, as the blood exhibited no size, and there 
was a suspicion that the disease originated in con- 
tagion. The patient had taken antimonials with- 
out any apparent effect, and after watching the state 
of the thermometer, with the bulb at the axilla, up- 
wards of an hour, though the mercury had sunk a 
single degree in that interval, it stood at the end of 
the time as high as 107°. In this state of things we 
resolved on trying the cold affusion, and every thing 
being prepared, he was stripped naked and listed out 
of bed. As we were about to throw the water upon 
him, it was observed that a perspiration had broken 
out all over him, but the heat being so great, we 
persisted in our purpose, and four gallons of fresh 
water of the temperature of 6o° were dashed up- 
on him; the effects were altogether surprising. On 
replacing him in bed, the mercury in the thermo- 
meter (the bulb at the axilla as before) rose to 98° 
only, and the burning heat of the extremities was 
|P_39
converted into a coolness that was rather alarming; 
the pulse had sunk in frequency to 90° but was 
full and steady. Gentle frictions were applied to 
the legs and feet, but they were not long continu- 
ed, for the general warmth speedily returned; the 
heat in the trunk of the body rose in about an 
hour to 100° and the pulse to 100. His dilirium 
went entirely off; the fur on his tongue speedily 
disappeared; and twenty hours afterwards he was 
found free of every complaint but debility. 

Subsequent experience has however convinced 
me that though in this case the termination was so 
happy, the cold affusion was not unattended with 
hazard. Perspiration had commenced and the heat 
was sinking. It had perhaps sunk more at the 
moment when the affusion was performed, than was 
indicated by the thermometer, for the bed-clothes 
often keep the body from cooling under perspira- 
tion to the degree that would otherwise be pro- 
duced. In this case when the surface is suddenly 
exposed to the external air the heat sinks rapidly. 
If the perspiration had continued an hour longer 
before this remedy was used, the heat would have 
been still more diminished; a torpor of the vessels 
of the surface, and of the extremities, would have 
been produced, followed by a great, and probably a 
dangerous re-action of the centre. This observa- 
tion will be illustrated in the sequel. 

|P_40
In recommending the affusion of cold water as a 
remedy in fever, an express exception is therefore 
made against its use during the feverish chill, or 
after the perspiration has begun to flow profusely, 
and more especially after it has continued to flow 
profusely for some time. An exception is also made 
against its being employed in the latter end of fever, 
when the strength is much exhausted, and the heat 
is sometimes as low or lower than the temperature 
of health. While, however, the heat rises one or 
two degrees above the healthy standard, this remedy 
may be used even in the latter stages of fever. I have 
employed it with advantage on the 11th, 12th, and 
13th days. In instances of this kind it will how- 
ever be prudent to make the degree of cold very 
moderate, as has been already observed; and as 
it is scarcely to be expected that at an advanced 
period of the disease, the progress of it can be stop- 
ped, or its duration much lessened, it may perhaps an- 
swer every purpose to employ in such cases the tepid
ablution. I have indeed often contented myself with 
spunging the body all over with tepid vinegar, or vi- 
negar and water, from the 9th or 10th day forwards; 
but I have frequently in cases where the heat conti- 
nued high, directed the general affusion of tepid 
water, by which the heat may always be speedily 
and and effectually reduced, when that is the only object in 
view.

|P_41
Under these restrictions, the affusion of cold 
water may be used with perfect safety in the low 
contagious fever of this country, and the facts al- 
ready stated will show that it is a remedy of great 
power and efficacy. In the first stages of fever, it 
appears very generally to cut short the disease almost 
instantaneously; and even when it fails of this effect, 
as is usually the case when it is applied in the more 
advanced stages, it nevertheless moderates the vio- 
lence of the symptoms, and shortens the duration of 
the fever. 

|P_42
[}CHAP. VIII. }]
[}General remarks on fever. History of a case of fever 
in which the affusion of cold water was not salu- 
tary. }]
Since the introduction of scientific arrangements 
into medicine, diseases have been much reduced 
in number, and their nature has been more clearly 
understood. This is especially true of continued fe- 
ver, which is exhibited by Dr. Cullen under three 
genera only, Synocha, Typhus, and Synochus. Of 
these genera, however, the Synocha, or pure in- 
flammatory fever, without topical inflammation, is 
confessedly a very rare occurrence in this island; 
the venerable profesfor used to declare that he 
had not met with a single instance of it in forty 
years practice. — And the typhus and synochus seem 
to be considered by him as the same disease, mo- 
dified differently, by the difference of climate, season, 
|P_43
and constitution. Both are described as contagious, 
and as occasionally producing each other. Doubt- 
less the typhus, or low contagious fever, is the pre- 
vailing fever of this island, and of Europe. It is 
the epidemic of all our great towns, of our jails, 
hospitals, and manufactories; its origin and progress 
are clearly ascertained, and its symptoms generally 
understood. It is to this fever that the preceding 
observations chiefly apply. 

I have my doubts, however, after much reflection 
and observation, whether we have not simplified 
too fast in our nosological arrangements of fever. 
The dreadful disease which prevailed lately at 
Philadelphia, and which now ravages the West 
Indies, cannot perhaps be included without some 
violence within our systems of Nosology; and its 
fatality under all the established modes of treatment, 
whilst it excites our deepest regret, must serve to 
abate the pride of modern science. — Even in our own 
island, it appears to me that cases of fever occasional- 
ly occur, which cannot be referred with advan- 
tage to any of the genera of Dr. Cullen [/7./]. The fol- 
|P_44
lowing is a description of a fever of this kind; I 
have not met with it often, but when I have met 
with it, it has very generally proved fatal, under the 
established modes of treatment; and I am sorry to 
say, that in the only instance of this fever in which 
I have tried it, the affusion of cold water proved 
unsuccessful also. 

The fever in question does not seem to originate 
in contagion, or to propagate itself by contagion. 
I have never been able in a single instance to trace 
it to that source, nor have I ever found it to be 
communicated from the patient to any of his atten- 
dants. The cases which I have seen have occurred 
chiefly in the winter season, in persons in the flower 
or vigour of life, possessed of considerable sensibi- 
lity of mind, and in the habits of more than ordi- 
nary mental exertion. After some days of indistinct 
catarrhal complaints, the fever comes on (in general 
after some accidental exposure to cold) with a very 
violent and long continued attack of chills and rigor, 
and to this, as is usual, succeeds a state of heat and 
re-action. The patient complains of intense head- 
ach and of oppression at the præcordia, with occasi- 
onal but not severe cough, and with some increase 
in the frequency of respiration. His pulse is not 
remarkable as to frequency or strength; his sleep 
is not particularly disturbed; and for some days 
the complaint goes on as if produced by catarrhal 
|P_45
fever. From the first, however, there appears a 
great quickness and impatience about the patient: 
he talks more rapidly than usual; apprehends you 
quickly, and answers you instantly. He cannot, 
however, command his attention long, and is fa- 
tigued with the effort. His heat, which was at 
first moderate, becomes very great on the 7th and 
8th day, reaching 107° or 110° of Fah'.; he be- 
comes delirious and talks incessantly. Throughout 
the fever, his senses of hearing and taste are uni- 
formly acute, and this is true also of his sense of 
feeling. Great as his heat is, he is much alive to 
the impressions of cold on the surface of the body, 
and shrinks from them. At times he appears sur- 
prisingly calm and natural, gets out of bed and 
dresses himself, insisting that he is well. Often he 
starts up suddenly in bed and opens his curtains, 
seeming to look round the room for some person he 
supposes present; and sometimes he rings the bell 
violently, if within his r£ach, without apparent 
object. Indistinct conceptions rise and vanish in his 
mind, and the impressions of sense are confounded 
with the ideas of imagination. As the fever ad- 
vances, the respiration becomes more hurried and 
laborious, and the pulse more frequent and feeble; 
and towards the latter end of the disease, but not 
before, perspirations break out, at first partial, and at 
length general and profuse, which however, though 
they reduce the heat, do not otherwise relieve him. 
|P_46
The pulse sinks; the body is covered with petechiæ; 
wine, bark, opium, and blisters, afford no relief: 
she patient dies on the twelfth or thirteenth day of 
fever, and after death the body runs rapidly into 
putrifaction. 

I have seen this fever treated by venesection 
and antimonials in the early stages, with a strict at- 
tention to the antiphlogistic regimen; and by 
bark and cordials, as the strength began to de- 
cline; but without success. I have also seen it 
treated from the first on the same plan as typhus, 
but with an equally unfortunate issue. In a case 
of this fever which occurred lately, I made use of 
the cold affusion, and as the mercury rose in the 
thermometer with the bulb under the tongue to 
108°, I employed this remedy with some degree 
of confidence. The effects did not correspond with 
my former experience, or with my hopes. The 
patient felt the cold most acutely, but was not re- 
lieved. His pulse did not diminish in frequency; 
his heat subsided very little, and that for a few mi- 
nutes only; neither diaphoresis nor sleep followed. 
This remedy was not repeated, but the surface of 
the body was spunged from time to time with vine- 
gar, without however producing sensible benefit 
or refreshment. 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
I have already mentioned that the affusion of cold 
|P_47
water is not to be used after a profuse perspiration 
has taken place; and that it is not to be used in the 
cold stage which begins the paroxysm of fever, 
nor till the hot stage be fairly formed. In the ty- 
phus, however, this last restriction seldom requires 
us to wait long; the affusion may be used in ge- 
neral in twenty-four hours from the original attack, 
and often much sooner. The case I have just re- 
lated is the only instance, out of many hundred 
trials, in which I found, that even on the sixth day 
of fever, with the actual heat of the body far above 
the temperature of health, the affusion of cold water 
was neither salutary nor refreshing. I have how- 
ever to observe, that notwithstanding the great heat 
of the body, producing the utmost restlessness and 
anxiety, the sensation of heat was interrupted by 
chillness, on the slightest application of cold, and 
that the surface and extremities not only felt chilly, 
but grew cold even on the accession of the external 
air. In reality, through the greater part of the fever, 
the state of the patient had a considerable resem- 
blance to what we see in the paroxysm of an in- 
termittent, when the cold stage is terminating, but 
the hot stage not fairly formed—when the heat as 
well as the blood, is accumulated in the centre of 
the system, and the vital power is struggling to 
give them that propulsion to the superficies which 
terminates in profuse perspiration, and carries off the 
disease. I have little doubt that immersion in the 
|P_48
tepid bath continued for some time (of the tempe- 
rature that feels comfortably warm to the skin) is 
the proper remedy in the fever 1 have described, as 
it doubtless is in the struggle of the paroxysm of in- 
termittent; and when an opportunity offers, I mean 
to ascertain the truth on this point. But this opi- 
nion will be illustrated when we come to speak of 
the warm bath more particularly. 

If any one should contend that the fever I have 
described is in reality only a variety of the typhus, 
or synochus, I shall not be disposed to contest the 
matter. The question concerning identity, leads to 
endless disputes in every branch of science where 
it occurs, and he must know little of nosology, 
who supposes it has yet received a consistency, 
that would render such a discussion profitable. 
It is sufficient for me to observe, that the symp- 
toms of the two diseases are in a considerable 
degree different, though with that general similari- 
ty that belongs td all cases of fever; that the state 
of the nervous system as to impressibility is widely 
different; and what is of most importances that the 
methods of treatment, which according to my ex- 
perience almost invariably succeed in the one disease, 
are unsuccessful in the other. Every practitioner 
knows, that in typhus, the sense of hearing is gene- 
rally obtuse; and the same may be said of the taste, 
smell, and touch; whether the observation is appli- 
|P_49
cable to the sight also, and under what restriction, 
appears to me doubtful. The acuteness of all these 
senses in the fever which I have described, is very 
remarkable, and particularly in regard to the sensi- 
bility of the surface. I have observed this symptom 
to be produced by several narcotics, and by some 
poisons. It is very remarkable in the hydropho- 
bia; and in the last days of a person who died of 
hunger, the senses of touch and vision were ex- 
tremely acute. [/8./]


[^1. 
* Now I believe physician to the army in the West Indies^]
[^2. 
* See a paper in the memoirs of the London Medical Society, Vol. III. p. 147, 
to be found in subsequent part of this Volume. 
^]
[^3. 
* Now Colonel Brereton of the 63d foot. 
^]
[^4. 
† The gallant and accomplished officer who fell soon after 
at the heights of Pharon, in the defence of Toulon. 
^]
[^5. 
* Paroxysmis quovis die binis. 
Gen. Morbor. vol. ii. p. 67. 
^]
[^6. 
* It may be supposed that the degree of impregnation of 
the river water with salt, must depend on the time of the 
tide when it is taken up. Thus, that it must be salter at the 
height of the stood, when the tide has run six hours from the 
sea, than at the period of low water, when it has run nearly 
the same time from the land. — I expected to find this the case, 
and endeavoured to ascertain the difference; but in a trial 
which I made by evaporating 40lbs. of water taken up at the 
height of the flood tide, and the same quantity taken up at low 
water, I could perceive no difference in the proportion of 
salt, a circumstance which I am unable to explain. The 
small difference that there was in the residuum in favour of 
the water taken up at the top of the tide, arose evidently from 
its feeing mingled with a large portion of dirt — the water at 
the top of the tide is mixed with dirt and feculencies, that 
taken at the lowest point of ebb is nearly pure. 
^]
[^7. 
* I am aware that all questions respecting Nosological 
arrangement have a tendency to degenerate into verbal dis- 
putes, and I willingly avoid them, referring for my accuracy 
to those who have studied diseases, not in books only, but in 
the volume of nature. 
^]
[^8. 
* This case will be found in subsequent part of this volume. 
^]