

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
THE deviation of Man from the state in which 
he was originally placed by Nature seems to have 
proved to him a prolific source of diseases. From 
the love of splendour, from the indulgences of 
luxury, and from his fondness for amusement, he 
has familiarised himself with a great number of 
animals, which may not originally have been in- 
tended for his associates. 

|P_2
The Wolf, disarmed of ferocity, is now pillowed 
in the lady's lap [/1./]. The Cat, the little Tiger of our 
island, whose natural home is the forest, is equally 
domesticated and caressed. The Cow, the Hog, the 
Sheep, and the Horse, are all, for a variety of 
purposes, brought under his care and dominion. 

There is a disease to which the Horse, from his 
state of domestication, is frequently subject. The 
Farriers have called it the Grease. It is an inflam- 
mation and swelling in the heel, from which issues 
matter possessing properties of a very peculiar kind, 
which seems capable of generating a disease in the 
Human body (after it has undergone the modification 
which I shall presently speak of), which bears so strong 
a resemblance to the Small Pox that I think it highly 
probable it may be the source of the disease. 

|P_3
In this Dairy Country a great number of Cows 
are kept, and the office of milking is performed 
indiscriminately by Men and Maid Servants. One 
of the former having been appointed to apply 
dressings to the heels of a Horse affected with the 
Grease, and not paying due attention to cleanli- 
ness, incautiously bears his part in milking the Cows, 
with some particles of the infectious matter ad- 
hering to his fingers. When this is the case, it 
commonly happens that a disease is communicated 
to the cows, and from the Cows to the Dairy-maids, 
which spreads through the farm until the most of the 
cattle and domestics feel its unpleasant conse- 
quences. This disease has obtained the name of 
the Cow Pox. It appears on the nipples of the 
Cows in the form of irregular pustules. At their 
first appearance they are commonly of a palish blue, 
or rather of a colour somewhat approaching to 
livid, and are surrounded by an erysipelatous in- 
|P_4
flammation. These pustules, unless a timely re- 
medy be applied, frequently degenerate into pha- 
gedenic ulcers, which prove extremely trouble- 
some [/2./]. The animals become indisposed, and the 
secretion of milk is much lessened. Inflamed spots 
now begin to appear on different parts of the hands 
of the domestics employed in milking, and some- 
times on the wrists, which quickly run on to sup- 
puration, first assuming the appearance of the small 
vesications produced by a burn. Most commonly 
they appear about the joints of the fingers, and 
at their extremities; but whatever parts are af- 
ected, if the situation will admit, these superficial 
suppurations put on a circular form, with their 
edges more elevated than their centre, and of a 
|P_5
colour distantly approaching to blue. Absorption 
takes place, and tumours appear in each axilla. 
The system becomes affected - the pulse is quick- 
ened; and shiverings, with general lassitude and 
pains about the loins and limbs, with vomiting, 
come on. The head is painful, and the patient is 
now and then even affected with delirium. These 
symptoms, varying in their degrees of violence, 
generally continue from one day to three or four, 
leaving ulcerated sores about the hands, which, from 
the sensibility of the parts, are very troublesome, 
and commonly heal slowly, frequently becoming 
phagedenic, like those from whence they sprung. 
The lips, nostrils, eyelids, and other parts of the 
body are sometimes affected with sores; but these 
evidently arise from their being heedlessly rubbed 
or scratched with the patient's infected fingers. 
No eruptions on the skin have followed the decline 
of the feverish symptoms in any instance that has 
|P_6
come under my inspection, one only excepted, and 
in this case a very few appeared on the arms: they 
were very minute, of a vivid red colour, and soon 
died away without advancing to maturation; so that 
I cannot determine whether they had any connection 
with the preceding symptoms. 

Thus the disease makes its progress from the 
Horse to the nipple of the Cow, and from the Cow 
to the Human Subject. 

Morbid matter of various kinds, when absorbed 
into the system, may produce effects in some degree 
similar; but what renders the Cow Pox virus so 
extremely singular is that the person who has been 
thus affected is forever after secure from the infec- 
tion of the Small Pox; neither exposure to the 
variolous effluvia, nor the insertion of the matter 
into the skin, producing this distemper. 

|P_7
In support of so extraordinary a fact, I shall lay before my reader a great number of instances [/3./]. 

[}CASE I. }]
JOSEPH MERRRET, now an Under Gardener to the 
Earl of Berkeley, lived as a Servant with a Farmer near 
this place in the year 1770, and occasionally assisted in 
milking his master's cows. Several horses belonging to the 
farm began to have sore heels, which Merret frequently 
attended. The cows soon became affected with the Cow 
Pox, and soon after several sores appeared on his hands. 
Swellings and stiffness in each axilla followed, and he was 
so much indisposed for several days as to be incapable of 
pursuing his ordinary employment. Previously to the ap- 
pearance of the distemper among the cows there was no 
fresh cow brought into the farm, nor any servant employed 
who was affected with the Cow Pox. 

In April, 1795, a general inoculation taking place here, 
Merret was inoculated with his family; so that a period of 
twenty-five years had elapsed from his having the Cow Pox 
|P_10
to this time. However, though the variolous matter was 
repeatedly inserted into his arm, I found it impracticable to 
infect him with it; an efflorescence only, taking on an 
erysipelatous look about the centre, appearing on the skin 
near the punctured parts. During the whole time that his 
family had the smallpox, one of whom had it very full, 
he remained in the house with them, but received no in- 
jury from exposure to the contagion. 

It is necessary to observe that the utmost care was taken 
to ascertain, with the most scrupulous precision, that no one 
whose case is here adduced had gone through the Small Pox 
previous to these attempts to produce that disease. 

Had these experiments been conducted in a large city, or 
in a populous neighbourhood, some doubts might have 
been entertained; but here, where population is thin, and 
where such an event as a person's having had the Small Pox 
is always faithfully recorded, no risk of inaccuracy in this 
particular can arise. 

[}CASE II. }]
SARAH PORTLOCK, of this place, was infected with 
the Cow Pox when a Servant at a Farmer's in the neigh 
bourhood, twenty-seven years ago [/4./]. 

In the year 1792, conceiving herself, from this circum- 
stance, secure from the infection of the Small Pox, she 
nursed one of her own children who had accidentally 
caught the disease, but no indisposition ensued. - During 
the time she remained in the infected room, variolous 
matter was inserted into both her arms, but without any 
further effect than in the preceding case. 

|P_12
[}CASE III. }]
JOHN PHILLIPS, a Tradesman of this town, had the 
Cow Pox at so early a period as nine years of age. At the 
age of sixty-two I inoculated him, and was very careful in 
selecting matter in its most active state. It was taken from 
the arm of a boy just before the commencement of the 
eruptive fever, and instantly inserted. It very speedily 
produced a sting-like feel in the part. An efflorescence 
appeared, which on the fourth day was rather extensive, 
and some degree of pain and stiffness were felt about the 
shoulder: but on the fifth day these symptoms began to 
disappear, and in a day or two after went entirely off, 
without producing any effect on the system. 

|P_13
[}CASE IV. }]
MARY BARGE, of Woodford, in this parish, was ino- 
culated with variolous matter in the year 1791. An efflo- 
rescence of a palish red colour soon appeared about the 
parts where the matter was inserted, and spread itself rather 
extensively, but died away in a few days without producing 
any variolous symptoms [/5./]. She has since been repeatedly 
employed as a nurse to Small-pox patients, without expe- 
riencing any ill consequences. This woman had the Cow 
Pox when she lived in the service of a farmer in this parish 
thirty-one years before. 

|P_14
[}CASE V. }]
MRS. H— , a respectable gentlewoman of this town, 
had the Cow Pox when very young. She received the 
infection in rather an uncommon manner: it was given by 
means of her handling some of the same utensils [/6./] which 
were in use among the servants of the family, who had the 
disease from milking infected cows. Her hands had many 
of the Cow Pox sores upon them, and they were commu- 
nicated to her nose, which became inflamed and very much 
swollen. soon after this event Mrs. H— was exposed to 
the contagion of the smallpox, where it was scarcely 
possible for her to have escaped, had she been susceptible of 
it, as she regularly attended a relative who had the disease 
in so violent a degree that it proved fatal to him. 

|P_15
In the year 1778 the Small Pox prevailed very much at 
Berkeley, and Mrs. H— not feeling perfectly satisfied 
respecting her safety (no indisposition having followed her 
exposure to the Small Pox), I inoculated her with active 
variolous matter. The same appearance followed as in the 
preceding cases — efflorescence on the arm without any 
effect on the constitution. 

[}CASE VI. }]
IT is a fact so well known among our Dairy Farmers, 
that those who have had the Small Pox either escape the 
Cow- Pox or are disposed to have it slightly, that as soon as 
the complaint shews itself among the cattle, assistants are 
procured, if possible, who are thus rendered less susceptible 
of it, otherwise the business of the farm could scarcely go 
forward. 

In the month of May, 1796, the Cow Pox broke out at 
Mr. Baker's, a farmer who lives near this place. The 
|P_16
disease was communicated by means of a cow which was 
purchased in an infected state at a neighbouring fair, and 
not one of the farmer's cows (consisting of thirty) which 
were at that time milked escaped the contagion. The 
family consisted of a man servant, two dairymaids, and a 
servant boy, who, with the farmer himself, were twice a 
day employed in milking the cattle. The whole of this 
family, except Sarah Wynne, one of the dairymaids, had 
gone through the Small Pox. The consequence was that 
the farmer and the servant boy escaped the infection of the 
Cow Pox entirely, and the servant man and one of the maid 
servants had each of them nothing more than a sore on one 
of their fingers, which produced no disorder in the system. 
But the other dairymaid, sarah Wynne, who never had 
the Small Pox, did not escape in so easy a manner. She 
caught the complaint from the cows, and was affected with 
the symptoms described in page 5th page in so violent a 
degree that she was confined to her bed, and rendered 
incapable for several days of pursuing her ordinary voca- 
tions in the farm. 

|P_17
March 28th, 1797, I inoculated this girl and carefully 
rubbed the variolous matter into two slight incisions made 
upon the left arm. A little inflammation appeared in the 
usual manner around the parts where the matter was in- 
serted, but so early as the fifth day it vanished entirely 
without producing any effect on the system. 

[}CASE VII. }]
ALTHOUGH the preceding history pretty clearly 
evinces that the constitution is far less susceptible of the 
contagion of the Cow Pox after it has felt that of the Small 
Pox, and although in general, as I have observed, they who 
have had the Small Pox, and are employed in milking cows 
which are infected with the Cow Pox, either escape the 
disorder, or have sores on the hands without feeling any 
general indisposition, yet the animal economy is subject to 
some variation in this respect, which the following rela- 
tion will point out: 

|P_18
In the summer of the year 1796 the Cow Pox appeared at 
the farm of Mr. Andrews, a considerable dairy adjoining 
to the town of Berkeley. It was communicated, as in the 
preceding instance, by an infected cow purchased at a fair 
in the neighbourhood. The family consisted of the farmer, 
his wife, two sons, a man and a maid servant; all of whom, 
except the farmer (who was fearful of the consequences), 
bore a part in milking the cows. The whole of them, ex- 
clusive of the man servant, had regularly gone through the 
Small Pox; but in this case no one who milked the cows 
escaped the contagion. All of them had sores upon their 
hands, and some degree of general indisposition, preceded 
by pains and tumours in the axillæ: but there was no com- 
parison in the severity of the disease as it was felt by the 
servant man, who had escaped the Small Pox, and by those 
of the family who had not, for, while he was confined to 
his bed, they were able, without much inconvenience, to 
follow their ordinary business. 

|P_19
February the 13th, 1797, I availed myself of opportunity 
of inoculating William Rodway, the servant man above al- 
luded to. Variolous matter was inserted into both his arms; 
in the right by means of superficial incisions, and into the left 
by slight punctures into the cutis. Both were perceptibly 
inflamed on the third day. After this the inflammation 
about the punctures soon died away, but a small appearance 
of erysipelas was manifest about the edges of the incisions 
till the eighth day, when a little uneasiness was felt for the 
space of half an hour in the right axilla. The inflamma- 
tion then hastily disappeared without producing the most 
distant mark of affection of the system. 

|P_20
[}CASE VIII. }]
ELIZABETH WYNNE, aged fifty-seven, lived as a 
servant with a neighbouring farmer thirty-eight years ago. 
She was then a dairymaid, and the Cow Pox broke out 
among the cows. She caught the disease with the rest of 
the family, but, compared with them, had it in a very 
slight degree, one very small sore only breaking out on the 
little finger of her left hand, and scarcely any perceptible 
indisposition following it. 

As the malady had shewn itself in so slight a manner, 
and as it had taken place at so distant a period of her life, I 
was happy with the opportunity of trying the effects of 
variolous matter upon her constitution, and on the 28th of 
March, 1797, I inoculated her by making two superficial 
incisions on the left arm, on which the matter was cautiously 
rubbed. A little efflorescence soon appeared, and a tin- 
|P_21
gling sensation was felt about the parts where the matter 
was inserted until the third day, when both began to 
subside, and so early as the fifth day it was evident that no 
indisposition would follow. 

[}CASE IX. }]
ALTHOUGH the Cow Pox shields the constitution from 
the Small Pox, and the small Pox proves a protection 
against its own future poison, yet it appears that the human 
body is again and again susceptible of the infectious matter 
of the Cow Pox, as the following history will demonstrate: 

William Smith, of Pyrton in this parish, contracted this 
disease when he lived with a neighbouring farmer in the 
year 1780. One of the horses belonging to the farm had 
sore heels, and it fell to his lot to attend him. By these 
means the infection was carried to the cows, and from the 
cows it was communicated to Smith. On one of his hands 
|P_22
were several ulcerated sores, and he was affected with such 
symptoms as have been before described. 

In the year 1791 the Cow Pox broke out at another farm 
where he then lived as a servant, and he became affected 
with it a second time; and in the year 1794 he was so 
unfortunate as to catch it again. The disease was equally 
as severe the second and third time as it was on the first [/7./]. 

In the spring of the year 1795 he was twice inoculated, 
but no affection of the system could be produced from the 
variolous matter; and he has since associated with those who 
had the Small Pox in its most contagious state without 
feeling any effect from it. 

|P_23
[}CASE X. }]
SIMON NICHOLS lived as a servant with Mr. Brom- 
edge, a gentleman who resides on his own farm in this 
parish, in the year 1782. He was employed in applying 
dressings to the sore heels of one of his master's horses, and 
at the same time assisted in milking the cows. The cows 
became affected in consequence, but the disease did not 
shew itself on their nipples till several weeks after he had 
begun to dress the horse. He quitted Mr. Bromedge's 
service, and went to another farm without any sores upon 
him; but here his hands soon began to be affected in the 
common way, and he was much indisposed with the usual 
symptoms. Concealing the nature of the malady from Mr. 
Cole, his new master, and being there also employed in 
milking, the Cow Pox was communicated to the cows. 

|P_24
Some years afterward Nichols was employed in a farm 
where the Small pox broke out, when I inoculated him 
with several other patients, with whom he continued 
during the whole time of their confinement. His arm 
inflamed, but neither the inflammation nor his associating 
with the inoculated family produced the least effect upon 
his constitution. 

[}CASE XI. }]
WILLIAM STINCHCOMB was a fellow servant with 
Nichols at Mr. Bromedge's farm at the time the cattle had 
the Cow Pox, and he was unfortunately infected by them. 
His left hand was very severely affected with several cor- 
roding ulcers, and a tumour of considerable size appeared 
in the axilla of that side. His right hand had only one 
small tumour upon it, and no tumour discovered itself in the 
corresponding axilla. 

|P_25
In the year 1792 Stinchcomb was inoculated with vario- 
lous matter, but no consequences ensued beyond a little 
inflammation in the arm for a few days. A large party 
were inoculated at the same time, some of whom had the 
disease in a more violent degree than is commonly seen 
from inoculation. He purposely associated with them, but 
could not receive the Small Pox. 

During the sickening of some of his companions their 
symptoms so strongly recalled to his mind his own state 
when sickening with the Cow Pox that he very pertinently 
remarked their striking similarity. 

|P_26
[}CASE XII. }]
THE paupers of the village of Tortworth, in this county, 
were inoculated by Mr. Henry Jenner, Surgeon, of Ber- 
keley, in the year 1795. Among them, eight patients pre- 
sented themselves who had at different periods of their lives 
had the Cow Pox. One of them, Hester Walkley, I attended 
with that disease when she lived in the service of a farmer 
in the same village in the year 1782; but neither this 
woman, nor any other of the patients who had gone 
through the Cow Pox, received the variolous infection 
either from the arm or from mixing in the society of the 
other patients who were inoculated at the same time. This 
state of security proved a fortunate circumstance, as many 
of the poor women were at the same time in a state of 
pregnancy. 

|P_27
[}CASE XIII. }]
One instance has occurred to me of the system being 
affected from the matter issuing from the heels of horses, 
and of its remaining afterwards unsusceptible of the vario- 
lous contagion; another, where the Small Pox appeared 
obscurely; and a third, in which its complete existence was 
positively ascertained. 

First, THOMAS PEARCE, is the son of a Smith and 
Farrier near to this place. He never had the Cow Pox; 
but, in consequence of dressing horses with sore heels at 
his father's, when a lad, he had sores on his fingers which 
suppurated, and which occasioned a pretty severe indispo- 
sition. Six years afterwards I inserted variolous matter into 
his arm repeatedly, without being able to produce any thing 
more than slight inflammation, which appeared very soon 
|P_28
after the matter was applied, and afterwards I exposed him 
to the contagion of the Small Pox with as little effect [/8./]. 

[}CASE XIV. }]
Secondly, Mr. JAMES COLE, a Farmer in this parish, 
had a disease from the same source as related in the pre- 
ceding case, and some years after was inoculated with 
variolous matter. He had a little pain in the axilla, and 
felt a slight indisposition for three or four hours. A few 
eruptions shewed themselves on the forehead, but they very 
soon disappeared without advancing to maturation. 

|P_29
[}CASE XIV. }]
Although in the former instances the system seemed 
to be secured, or nearly so, from variolous infection, by the 
absorption of matter from the sores produced by the diseased 
heels of horses, yet the following case decisively proves 
that this cannot be entirely relied upon until a disease 
has been generated by the morbid matter from the horse on 
the nipple of the cow, and passed through that medium to 
the human subject. 

Mr. ABRAHAM RIDDIFORD, a farmer at Stone in 
this parish, in consequence of dressing a mare that had sore 
heels, was affected with very painful sores in both his 
hands, tumours in each axilla, and severe and general 
indisposition. A surgeon in the neighbourhood attended 
him, who knowing the similarity between the appearance 
of the sores upon his hands and those produced by the 
|P_30
Cow Pox, and being acquainted also with the effects of 
that disease on the human constitution, assured him that he 
never need to fear the infection of the Small Pox; but this 
assertion proved fallacious, for, on being exposed to the 
infection upwards of twenty years afterwards, he caught 
the disease, which took its regular course in a very mild 
way. There certainly was a difference perceptible, although 
it is not easy to describe it, in the general appearance of the 
pustules from that which we commonly see. Other prac- 
titioners who visited the patient at my request agreed with 
me in this point, though there was no room left for suspicion 
as to the reality of the disease, as I inoculated some of his 
family from the pustules, who had the Small Pox, with its 
usual appearances, in consequence. 

|P_31
[}CASE XVI. }]
SARAH NELMES, a dairymaid at a farmer's near this 
place, was infected with the Cow Pox from her master's 
cows in May, 1796. She received the infection on a part 
of her hand which had been previously in a slight degree 
injured by a scratch from a thorn. A large pustulous sore 
and the usual symptoms accompanying the disease were 
produced in consequence. The pustule was so expressive 
of the true character of the Cow Pox, as it commonly 
appears upon the hand, that I have given a representation 
of it in the annexed plate. The two small pustules on the 
wrists arose also from the application of the virus to some 
minute abrasions of the cuticle, but the livid tint, if they 
ever had any, was not conspicuous at the time I saw the 
patient. The pustule on the forefinger shews the disease in 
an earlier stage. It did not actually appear on the hand of 
|P_32
this young woman, but was taken from that of another, 
and is annexed for the purpose of representing the malady 
after it has newly appeared. 

[}CASE XVII. }]
The more accurately to observe the progress of the 
infection I selected a healthy boy, about eight years old, 
for the purpose of inoculation for the Cow Pox. The 
matter was taken from a sore on the hand of a dairymaid [/9./], 
who was infected by her master's cows, and it was inserted, 
on the 14th of May, 1796, into the arm of the boy by 
means of two superficial incisions, barely penetrating the 
cutis, each about half an inch long. 

|P_33
On the seventh day he complained of uneasiness in the 
axilla, and on the ninth he became a little chilly, lost his 
appetite, and had a slight head-ach. During the whole of 
this day he was perceptibly indisposed, and spent the night 
with some degree of restlessness, but on the day following 
he was perfectly well. 

The appearance of the incisions in their progress to a 
state of maturation were much the same as when pro- 
duced in a similar manner by variolous matter. The 
only difference which I perceived was, in the state of the 
limpid fluid arising from the action of the virus, which 
assumed rather a darker hue, and in that of the efflorescence 
spreading round the incisions, which had more of an erysi- 
pelatous look than we commonly perceive when variolous 
matter has been made use of in the same manner; but the 
whole died away (leaving on the inoculated parts scabs and 
subsequent eschars) without giving me or my patient the 
least trouble. 

|P_34
In order to ascertain whether the boy, after feeling so 
slight an affection of the system from the Cow-pox virus, 
was secure from the contagion of the Small-pox, he was 
inoculated the 1st of July following with variolous matter, 
immediately taken from a pustule. several slight punctures 
and incisions were made on both his arms, and the matter 
was carefully inserted, but no disease followed. The same 
appearances were observable on the arms as we commonly 
see when a patient has had variolous matter applied, after 
having either the Cow-pox or the Small-pox. Several months 
afterwards he was again inoculated with variolous matter, 
but no sensible effect was produced on the constitution. 

Here my researches were interrupted till the spring of the 
year 1798, when, from the wetness of the early part of the 
season, many of the farmers' horses in this neighbourhood 
were affected with sore heels, in consequence of which the 
Cow-pox broke out among several of our dairies, which 
afforded me an opportunity of making further observations 
upon this curious disease. 

|P_35
A mare, the property of a person who keeps a dairy in 
a neighbouring parish, began to have sore heels the latter 
end of the month of February, 1798, which were occasi- 
onally washed by the servant men of the farm, Thomas 
Virgoe, William Wherret, and William Haynes, who in 
consequence became affected with sores in their hands, 
followed by inflamed lymphatic glands in the arms and 
axillæ, shiverings succeeded by heat, lassitude, and general 
pains in the limbs. A single paroxysm terminated the 
disease; for within twenty-four hours they were free from 
general indisposition, nothing remaining but the sores on 
their hands. Haynes and Virgoe, who had gone through 
the Small-pox from inoculation, described their feelings as 
very similar to those which affected them on sickening with 
that malady. Wherret never had had the Small pox. 
Haynes was daily employed as one of the milkers at the 
farm, and the disease began to shew itself among the cows 
about ten days after he first assisted in washing the mare's 
heels. Their nipples became sore in the usual way, with 
bluish pustules; but as remedies were early applied, they 
did not ulcerate to any extent. 

|P_36
[}CASE XVIII. }]
JOHN BAKER, a child of five years old, was inoculated 
March 16, 1798, with matter taken from a pustule on the 
hand of Thomas Virgoe, one of the servants who had been 
infected from the mare's heels. He became ill on the 6th 
day with symptoms similar to those excited by Cow-pox 
matter. On the 8th day he was free from indisposition. 

There was some variation in the appearance of the pustule 
on the arm. Although it somewhat resembled a Small-pox 
pustule, yet its similitude was not so conspicuous as when 
excited by matter from the nipple of the cow, or when the 
matter has passed from thence through the medium of the 
human subject.—(See Plate, No. 2.) 

This experiment was made to ascertain the progress and 
subsequent effects of the disease when thus propagated. 
|P_37
We have seen that the virus from the horse, when it proves 
infectious to the human subject, is not to be relied upon as 
rendering the system secure from variolous infection, but 
that the matter produced by it upon the nipple of the cow 
is perfectly so. Whether its passing from the horse through 
the human constitution, as in the present instance, will 
produce a similar effect, remains to be decided. This would 
now have been effected, but the boy was rendered unfit 
for inoculation from having felt the effects of a contagious 
fever in a work-house, soon after this experiment was made. 

[}CASE XIX. }]
WILLIAM SUMMERS, a child of five years and a half 
old, was inoculated the same day with Baker, with matter 
taken from the nipples of one of the infected cows, at the 
farm alluded to in page 35. He became indisposed on the 
6th day, vomited once, and felt the usual slight symptoms 
till the 8th day, when he appeared perfectly well. The 
progress of the pustule, formed by the infection of the virus 
|P_38
was similar to that noticed in Case XVII., with this exception, 
its being free from the livid tint observed in that instance. 

[}CASE XX }]
FROM William Summers the disease was transferred to 
William Pead a boy of eight years old, who was inoculated 
March 28th. On the 6th day he complained of pain in the 
axilla, and on the 7th was affected with the common symp- 
toms of a patient sickening with the Small-pox from inocu- 
lation, which did not terminate 'till the third day after the 
seizure. So perfect was the similarity to the variolous 
fever that I was induced to examine the skin, conceiving 
there might have been some eruptions, but none appeared. 
The efflorescent blush around the part punctured in the 
boy's arm was so truly characteristic of that which appears 
on variolous inoculation, that I have given a representation 
of it. The drawing was made when the pustule was begin- 
ning to die away and the areola retiring from the centre. 
(See plate, No. 3.) 

|P_39
[}CASE XXI. }]
April 5th: several children and adults were inoculated 
from the arm of William Pead. The greater part of them 
sickened on the sixth day, and were well on the 7th, but in 
three of the number a secondary indisposition arose in con- 
sequence of an extensive erysipelatous inflammation which 
appeared on the inoculated arms. It seemed to arise from 
the state of the pustule, which spread out, accompanied 
with some degree of pain, to about half the diameter of a 
six-pence. One of these patients was an infant of half a year 
old. By the application of mercurial ointment to the 
inflamed parts (a treatment recommended under similar 
circumstances in the inoculated Small-pox) the complaint 
subsided without giving much trouble. 

HANNAH EXCELL, an healthy girl of seven years old, 
and one of the patients above mentioned, received the 
|P_40
infection from the insertion of the virus under the cuticle of 
the arm in three distinct points. The pustules which arose 
in consequence so much resembled, on the 12th day, those 
appearing from the infection of variolous matter, that an 
experienced Inoculator would scarcely have discovered a 
shade of difference at that period. Experience now tells me that almost the only variation which follows consists in the pustulous fluids remaining limpid nearly to the time of its 
total disappearance; and not, as in the direct Small-pox, 
becoming purulent.—(See plate, No. 4.) 

[}CASE XXII. }]
FROM the arm of this girl matter was taken and inserted 
April 12th into the arms of John Marklove, one year and a 
half old, 
Robert F. Jenner, eleven months old, 
Mary Pead, five years old, and 
Mary James, six years old. 

|P_41
 Among these Robert F. Jenner did not receive the infec- 
tion. The arms of the other three inflamed properly and 
began to affect the system in the usual manner; but being 
under some apprehensions from the preceding cases that a 
troublesome erysipelas might arise, I determined on making 
an experiment with the view of cutting off its source. 
Accordingly, after the patients had felt an indisposition of 
about twelve hours, I applied in two of these Cases out of 
the three, on the vesicle formed by the virus, a little mild 
caustic, composed of equal parts of quick-lime and soap, 
and suffered it to remain on the part six hours [/10./]. It seemed 
to give the children but little uneasiness, and effectually 
answered my intention in preventing the appearance of 
erysipelas. Indeed it seemed to do more, for in half an 
hour after its application the indisposition of the children 
ceased [/11./]. These precautions were perhaps unnecessary as 
|P_42
the arm of the third child, Mary Pead, which was suffered 
to take its common course, scabbed quickly, without any 
erysipelas. 

[}CASE XXIII. }]
FROM this child's arm matter was taken and transferred 
to that of J. Barge, a boy of seven years old. He sickened 
on the 8th day, went through the disease with the usual 
slight symptoms, and without any inflammation on the arm 
beyond the common efflorescence surrounding the pustule, 
an appearance so often seen in inoculated Small-pox. 

After the many fruitless attempts to give the Small-pox to 
those who had had the Cow-pox, it did not appear neces- 
sary, nor was it convenient to me, to inoculate the whole of 
those who had been the subjects of these late trials; yet I 
thought it right to see the effects of variolous matter on 
some of them, particularly William summers, the first of 
these patients who had been infected with matter taken 
|P_43
from the cow. He was, therefore, inoculated with variolous 
matter from a fresh pustule; but, as in the preceding 
Cases, the system did not feel the effects of it in the 
smallest degree. I had an opportunity also of having this boy 
and William Pead inoculated by my nephew, Mr. Henry 
Jenner, whose report to me is as follows: "I have inoculated Pead and Barge, two of the boys whom you lately infected with the Cow Pox. On the second day the incisions were inflamed and there was a pale inflammatory stain around them. On the third day these appearances were still increasing and their arms itched considerably. On the fourth day the inflammation was evidently subsiding, and on the sixth day it was scarcely perceptible. No symptom of indisposition followed. "

"To convince myself that the variolous matter made use of was in a perfect state I at the same time inoculated a patient with some of it who never had gone through the Cow Pox, and it produced the smallpox in the usual regular manner. "

|P_44
These experiments afforded me much satisfaction, they 
proved that the matter, in passing from one human subject to 
another, through five gradations, lost none of its original 
properties, J. Barge being the fifth who received the infec- 
tion successively from William summers, the boy to whom 
it was communicated from the cow. 

|P_45
I shall now conclude this inquiry with some 
general observations on the subject, and on 
some others which are interwoven with it. 

Although I presume it may be unnecessary to 
produce further testimony in support of my asser- 
tion "that the Cow-pox protects the human con- 
stitution from the infection of the Small-pox, " yet 
it affords me considerable satisfaction to say, that 
Lord Somerville, the President of the Board of 
Agriculture, to whom this paper was shewn by 
Sir Joseph Banks, has found upon inquiry that the 
statements were confirmed by the concurring tes- 
timony of Mr. Dolland, a surgeon, who resides in 
a dairy country remote from this, in which these 
observations were made. With respect to the 
opinion adduced "that the source of the infection "
|P_46
"is a peculiar morbid matter arising in the horse, "
although I have not been able to prove it from 
actual experiments conducted immediately under 
my own eye, yet the evidence I have adduced 
appears sufficient to establish it. 

They who are not in the habit of conducting 
experiments may not be aware of the coincidence 
of circumstances necessary for their being managed 
so as to prove perfectly decisive; nor how often men 
engaged in professional pursuits are liable to inter- 
ruptions which disappoint them almost at the 
instant of their being accomplished: however, 
I feel no room for hesitation respecting the com- 
mon origin of the disease, being well convinced 
that it never appears among the cows (except it 
can be traced to a cow introduced among the 
|P_47
general herd which has been previously infected, 
or to an infected servant) unless they have been 
milked by some one who, at the same time, has 
the care of a horse affected with diseased heels. 

 The spring of the year 1797, which I intended 
particularly to have devoted to the completion of 
this investigation, proved, from its dryness, re- 
markably adverse to my wishes; for it frequently 
happens, while the farmers\rquote horses are exposed to 
the cold rains which fall at that season that their 
heels become diseased, and no Cow-pox then 
appeared in the neighbourhood. 

The active quality of the virus from the horses' 
heels is greatly increased after it has acted on the 
nipples of the cow, as it rarely happens that the 
|P_48
horse affects his dresser with sores, and as rarely 
that a milk-maid escapes the infection when she 
milks infected cows. It is most active at the 
commencement of the disease, even before it has 
acquired a pus-like appearance; indeed, I am not 
confident whether this property in the matter does 
not entirely cease as soon as it is secreted in the 
form of pus. I am induced to think it does 
cease [/12./], and that it is the thin darkish-looking 
fluid only, oozing from the newly-formed cracks 
in the heels, similar to what sometimes appears 
from erysipelatous blisters, which gives the disease. 
Nor am I certain that the nipples of the cows are 
at all times in a state to receive the infection. The 
appearance of the disease in the spring and the 
|P_49
early part of the summer, when they are disposed 
to be affected with spontaneous eruptions so much 
more frequently than at other seasons, induces me 
to think, that the virus from the horse must be 
received upon them when they are in this state, in 
order to produce effects: experiments, however, 
must determine these points. But it is clear that 
when the Cow-pox virus is once generated, that 
the cows cannot resist the contagion, in whatever 
state their nipples may chance to be, if they are 
milked with an infected hand. 

Whether the matter, either from the cow or the 
horse will affect the sound skin of the human 
body, I cannot positively determine; probably 
it will not, unless on those parts where the cuti- 
cle is extremely thin, as on the lips, for example. 
|P_50
I have known an instance of a poor girl who 
produced an ulceration on her lip by frequently 
holding her finger to her mouth to cool the raging 
of a Cow-pox sore by blowing upon it. The 
hands of the farmers' servants here, from the 
nature of their employments, are constantly ex- 
posed to those injuries which occasion abrasions 
of the cuticle, to punctures from thorns, and such 
like accidents; so that they are always in a state 
to feel the consequence of exposure to infectious 
matter. 

It is singular to observe that the Cow-pox virus, 
although it renders the constitution unsusceptible 
of the variolous, should nevertheless, leave it 
unchanged with respect to its own action. I have 
|P_51
already produced an instance [/13./] to point out this, 
and shall now corroborate it with another. 

Elizabeth Wynne, who had the Cow-pox in the 
year 1759, was inoculated with variolous matter, 
without effect, in the year 1797, and again caught 
the Cow Pox in the year 1798. When I saw her, 
which was on the 8th day after she received the 
infection, I found her affected with general lassi- 
tude, shiverings, alternating with heat, coldness 
of the extremities, and a quick and irregular 
pulse. These symptoms were preceded by a pain 
in the axilla. On her hand was one large pustu- 
lous sore, which resembled that delineated in Plate 
No. 1. 

|P_52
It is curious also to observe that the virus, 
which with respect to its effects is undetermined 
and uncertain previously to its passing from the 
horse through the medium of the cow, should then 
not only become more active, but should inva- 
riably and completely possess those specific pro- 
perties which induce in the human constitution 
symptoms similar to those of the variolous fever, 
and effect in it that peculiar change which for 
ever renders it unsusceptible of the variolous con- 
tagion. 

May it not then be reasonably conjectured, that 
the source of the Small-pox is morbid matter of a 
peculiar kind, generated by a disease in the horse, 
and that accidental circumstances may have again 
and again arisen, still working new changes upon 
|P_53
it until it has acquired the contagious and malig- 
nant form under which we now commonly see it 
making its devastations amongst us? And, from a 
consideration of the change which the infectious 
matter undergoes from producing a disease on the 
cow, may we not conceive that many contagious 
diseases, now prevalent among us, may owe their 
present appearance not to a simple, but to a com- 
pound origin? For example, is it difficult to 
imagine that the measles, the scarlet fever, and the 
ulcerous sore throat with a spotted skin, have all 
sprung from the same source, assuming some 
variety in their forms according to the nature of 
their new combinations? The same question will 
apply respecting the origin of many other conta- 
gious diseases, which bear a strong analogy to each 
other. 

|P_54
 There are certainly more forms than one, 
without considering the common variation be- 
tween the confluent and distinct, in which the 
Small-pox appears in what is called the natural 
way.— About seven years ago a species of Small- 
pox spread through many of the towns and 
villages of this part of Gloucestershire: it was 
of so mild a nature, that a fatal instance was 
scarcely ever heard of, and consequently so little 
dreaded by the lower orders of the community, 
that they scrupled not to hold the same intercourse 
with each other as if no infectious disease had been 
present among them. I never saw nor heard of 
an instance of its being confluent. The most 
accurate manner, perhaps, in which I can convey 
an idea of it is, by saying, that had fifty indi- 
viduals been taken promiscuously and infected 
|P_55
by exposure to this contagion, they would have 
had as mild and light a disease as if they had 
been inoculated with variolous matter in the 
usual way. The harmless manner in which 
it shewed itself could not arise from any pecu- 
liarity either in the season or the weather, for I 
watched its progress upwards of a year without 
perceiving any variation in its general appearance. 
I consider it then as a variety of the Small- 
pox [/14./]. 

In some of the preceding cases I have noticed 
the attention that was paid to the state of the 
|P_56
variolous matter previous to the experiment of 
inserting it into the arms of those who had gone 
through the Cow-pox. This I conceived to be 
of great importance in conducting these experi- 
ments, and, were it always properly attended to by 
those who inoculate for the Small-pox, it might 
prevent much subsequent mischief and confusion. 
With the view of enforcing so necessary a pre- 
caution I shall take the liberty of digressing so 
far as to point out some unpleasant facts, rela- 
tive to mismanagement in this particular, which 
have fallen under my own observation. 

A medical gentleman (now no more), who 
for many years inoculated in this neighbourhood, 
frequently preserved the variolous matter intended 
for his use on a piece of lint or cotton, which, in 
|P_57
its fluid state, was put into a vial, corked, and 
conveyed into a warm pocket; a situation cer- 
tainly favourable for speedily producing putrefac- 
tion in it. In this state (not unfrequently after 
it had been taken several days from the pustules) 
it was inserted into the arms of his patients, and 
brought on inflammation of the incised parts, 
swellings of the axillary glands, fever, and some- 
times eruptions. But what was this disease? Cer- 
tainly not the Small-pox; for the matter having 
from putrefaction lost, or suffered a derangement 
in its specific properties, was no longer capable 
of producing that malady, those who had been 
inoculated in this manner being as much sub- 
ject to the contagion of the Small-pox, as if 
they had never been under the influence of this 
artificial disease; and many, unfortunately, fell 
|P_58
victims to it, who thought themselves in perfect 
security. The same unfortunate circumstance of 
giving a disease, supposed to be the Small-pox, 
with inefficacious variolous matter, having occur- 
red under the direction of some other practitioners 
within my knowledge, and probably from the same 
incautious method of securing the variolous mat- 
ter, I avail myself of this opportunity of men- 
tioning what I conceive to be of great importance; 
and, as a further cautionary hint, I shall again 
digress so far as to add another observation on the 
subject of Inoculation

Whether it be yet ascertained by experiment, 
that the quantity of variolous matter inserted into 
the skin makes any difference with respect to the 
subsequent mildness or violence of the disease, I 
|P_59
know not; but I have the strongest reason for 
supposing that if either the punctures or incisions 
be made so deep as to go through it and wound 
the adipose membrane, that the risk of bringing 
on a violent disease is greatly increased. I have 
known an inoculator, whose practice was "to cut deep enough (to use his own expression) to see a bit of fat, " and there to lodge the matter. The 
great number of bad Cases, independent of inflam- 
mations and abscesses on the arms, and the fatality 
which attended this practice was almost incon- 
ceivable; and I cannot account for it on any 
other principle than that of the matter being placed 
in this situation instead of the skin. 

It was the practice of another, whom I well 
remember, to pinch up a small portion of the skin 
|P_60
on the arms of his patients and to pass through it 
a needle, with a thread attached to it previously 
dipped in variolous matter. The thread was 
lodged in the perforated part, and consequently 
left in contact with the cellular membrane. This 
practice was attended with the same ill success as 
the former. Although it is very improbable that 
any one would now inoculate in this rude way by 
design, yet these observations may tend to place a 
double guard over the lancet, when infants, whose 
skins are comparatively so very thin, fall under 
the care of the inoculator. 

A very respectable friend of mine, Dr. Hard- 
wicke, of sodbury in this county, inoculated great 
numbers of patients previous to the introduction 
of the more modern method by Sutton, and with 
|P_61
such success, that a fatal instance occurred as 
rarely as since that method has been adopted. It 
was the doctor's practice to make as slight an in- 
cision as possible upon the skin, and there to lodge 
a thread saturated with the variolous matter. 
When his patients became indisposed, agreeably 
to the custom then prevailing, they were directed 
to go to bed and were kept moderately warm. Is 
it not probable then, that the success of the modern 
practice may depend more upon the method of 
invariably depositing the virus in or upon the skin, 
than on the subsequent treatment of the disease? 

 I do not mean to insinuate that exposure to cool 
air, and suffering the patient to drink cold water 
when hot and thirsty, may not moderate the erup- 
tive symptoms and lessen the number of pustules; 
|P_62
yet, to repeat my former observation, I cannot 
account for the uninterrupted success, or nearly so, 
of one practitioner, and the wretched state of the 
patients under the care of another, where, in both 
instances, the general treatment did not differ 
essentially, without conceiving it to arise from the 
different modes of inserting the matter for the 
purpose of producing the disease. As it is not the 
identical matter inserted which is absorbed into the 
constitution, but that which is, by some peculiar 
process in the animal economy, generated by it, 
is it not probable that different parts of the human 
body may prepare or modify the virus differently? 
Although the skin, for example, adipose mem- 
brane, or mucous membranes are all capable of 
producing the variolous virus by the stimulus given 
by the particles originally deposited upon them, 
|P_63
yet I am induced to conceive that each of these 
parts is capable of producing some variation in 
the qualities of the matter previous to its affecting 
the constitution. What else can constitute the 
difference between the Small-pox when communi- 
cated casually or in what has been termed the 
natural way, or when brought on artificially 
through the medium of the skin? After all, are 
the variolous particles, possessing their true specific 
and contagious principles, ever taken up and con- 
veyed by the lymphatics unchanged into the blood 
vessels? I imagine not. Were this the case, 
should we not find the blood sufficiently loaded 
with them in some stages of the Small-pox to com- 
municate the disease by inserting it under the 
cuticle, or by spreading it on the surface of an 
ulcer? Yet experiments have determined the im- 
|P_64
practicability of its being given in this way; al- 
though it has been proved that variolous matter 
when much diluted with water and applied to the 
skin in the usual manner, will produce the dis- 
ease. But it would be digressing beyond a 
proper boundary, to go minutely into this subject 
here. 

At what period the Cow-pox was first noticed 
here is not upon record. Our oldest farmers were 
not unacquainted with it in their earliest days, 
when it appeared among their farms without any 
deviation from the phœnomena which it now ex- 
hibits. Its connection with the Small-pox seems 
to have been unknown to them. Probably the 
general introduction of inoculation first occasioned 
the discovery. 

|P_65
Its rise in this country may not have been of 
very remote date, as the practice of milking cows 
might formerly have been in the hands of women 
only; which I believe is the case now in some 
other dairy countries, and, consequently, that the 
cows might not in former times have been exposed 
to the contagious matter brought by the men ser- 
vants from the heels of horses [/15./]. Indeed, a know- 
ledge of the source of the infection is new in the 
minds of most of the farmers in this neighbour- 
hood, but it has at length produced good con- 
sequences; and it seems probable, from the pre- 
cautions they are now disposed to adopt, that the 
|P_66
appearance of the Cow-pox here may either be 
entirely extinguished or become extremely rare. 

Should it be asked whether this investigation is 
a matter of mere curiosity, or whether it tends to 
any beneficial purpose? I should answer, that 
notwithstanding the happy effects of Inoculation, 
with all the improvements which the practice has 
received since its first introduction into this 
country, it not very unfrequently produces defor- 
mity of the skin, and sometimes, under the best 
management, proves fatal. 

These circumstances must naturally create in 
every instance some degree of painful solicitude 
for its consequences. But as I have never known 
fatal effects arise from the Cow-pox, even when 
|P_67
impressed in the most unfavourable manner, pro- 
ducing extensive inflammations and suppurations 
on the hands; and as it clearly appears that this 
disease leaves the constitution in a state of perfect 
security from the infection of the Small-pox, may 
we not infer that a mode of Inoculation may be 
introduced preferable to that at present adopted, 
especially among those families which, from 
previous circumstances, we may judge to be predis- 
posed to have the disease unfavourably? It is an 
excess in the number of pustules which we chiefly 
dread in the Small-pox; but in the Cow-pox, no 
pustules appear, nor does it seem possible for the 
contagious matter to produce the disease from 
effluvia, or by any other means than contact, and 
that probably not simply between the virus and 
the cuticle; so that a single individual in a family 
|P_68
might at any time receive it without the risk of 
infecting the rest or of spreading a distemper that 
fills a country with terror. Several instances have 
come under my observation which justify the 
assertion that the disease cannot be propagated by 
effluvia. The first boy whom I inoculated with 
the matter of Cow-pox slept in a bed, while the 
experiment was going forward, with two children 
who never had gone through either that disease or 
the Small-pox, without infecting either of them. 

A young woman who had the Cow-pox to a 
great extent, several sores which maturated having 
appeared on the hands and wrists, slept in the same 
bed with a fellow-dairy maid who never had been 
infected with either the Cow-pox or the Small- 
pox, but no indisposition followed. 

|P_69
Another instance has occurred of a young 
woman on whose hands were several large suppu- 
rations from the Cow-pox, who was at the same 
time a daily nurse to an infant, but the complaint 
was not communicated to the child. 

In some other points of view the inoculation 
of this disease appears preferable to the variolous 
inoculation. 

In constitutions predisposed to scrophula, how 
frequently we see the inoculated Small-pox, rouse 
into activity that distressful malady. This circum- 
stance does not seem to depend on the manner in 
which the distemper has shewn itself, for it has as 
frequently happened among those who have had it 
mildly, as when it has appeared in the contrary way. 

|P_70
There are many, who from some peculiarity in 
the habit resist the common effects of variolous 
matter inserted into the skin, and who are in con- 
sequence haunted through life with the distressing 
idea of being insecure from subsequent infection. 
A ready mode of dissipating anxiety originating 
from such a cause must now appear obvious. And, 
as we have seen that the constitution may at any 
time be made to feel the febrile attack of Cow- 
pox, might it not, in many chronic diseases be 
introduced into the system, with the probability 
of affording relief, upon well-known physiolo- 
gical principles? 

Although I say the system may at any time be 
made to feel the febrile attack of Cow Pox, yet I 
have a single instance before me where the virus 
|P_71
acted locally only, but it is not in the least proba- 
ble that the same person would resist the action 
both of the Cow-pox virus and the variolous. 

Elizabeth Sarsenet lived as a dairy maid at New- 
park farm, in this parish. All the cows and the ser- 
vants employed in milking had the Cow-pox; but 
this woman, though she had several sores upon 
her fingers, felt no tumours in the axillæ, nor any 
general indisposition. On being afterwards casu- 
ally exposed to variolous infection, she had the 
Small-pox in a mild way.—Hannah Pick, another 
of the dairymaids who was a fellow-servant with 
Elizabeth Sarsenet when the distemper broke out 
at the farm was, at the same time infected; but 
this young woman had not only sores upon her 
hands, but felt herself also much indisposed for a 
|P_72
day or two. After this, I made several attempts 
to give her the Small-pox by inoculation, but 
they all proved fruitless. From the former Case 
then we see that the animal economy is subject to 
the same laws in one disease as the other. 

The following Case which has very lately occur- 
red renders it highly probable that not only the 
heels of the horse, but other parts of the body of 
that animal, are capable of generating the virus 
which produces the Cow-pox. 

An extensive inflammation of the erysipelatous 
kind, appeared without any apparent cause upon 
the upper part of the thigh of a sucking colt, the 
property of Mr. Millet, a farmer at Rockhampton, 
a village near Berkeley. The inflammation con- 
|P_73
tinued several weeks, and at length terminated in 
the formation of three or four small abscesses. The 
inflamed parts were fomented, and dressings were 
applied by some of the same persons who were 
employed in milking the cows. The number of 
cows milked was twenty-four, and the whole of 
them had the Cow-pox. The milkers, consisting 
of the farmer's wife, a man and a maid servant, 
were infected by the cows. The man-servant had 
previously gone through the Small-pox, and felt 
but little of the Cow-pox. The servant maid had 
some years before been infected with the Cow-pox, 
and she also felt it now in a slight degree: But the 
farmer's wife who never had gone through either 
of the diseases, felt its effects very severely. 

|P_74
That the disease produced upon the cows by the 
colt and from thence conveyed to those who 
milked them was the true and not the spurious
Cow-pox [/16./], there can be scarcely any room for 
suspicion; yet it would have been more completely 
satisfactory, had the effects of variolous matter been 
ascertained on the farmer's wife, but there was a 
peculiarity in her situation which prevented my 
making the experiment. 

Thus far have I proceeded in an inquiry, 
founded, as it must appear, on the basis of ex- 
periment; in which, however, conjecture has 
been occasionally admitted in order to present to 
persons well situated for such discussions, objects 
|P_75
for a more minute investigation. In the mean 
time I shall myself continue to prosecute this 
inquiry, encouraged by the hope of its becoming 
essentially beneficial to mankind. 
FINIS. 


[^1. * The late Mr.John Hunter proved, by experiments, that the Dog is the Wolf in a degenerated state. ^]
[^2. They who attend sick cattle in this country find a speedy remedy for stopping 
the progress of this complaint in those applications which act chemically upon 
the morbid matter, such as the solutions of the Vitriolum Zinci, the Vitriolum 
Cupri, &c. ^]
[^3. It is necessary to observe, that pustulous sores frequently appear spontaneously 
on the nipples of Cows, and instances have occured, though very rarely, of the 
hands of the servants employed in milking being affected with sores in consequence, 
and even of their feeling an indisposition from that contagion which con- 
stitutes the true Cow Pox. They are always free from the bluish or livid tint so 
conspicious in the pultules in that disease. No eryssipelas attends them, nor do they 
shew any phagedenic disposition as in the other case, but quickly terminate in a scab 
without creating any apparent disorder in the Cow. This complaint appears at 
various seasons of the year, but most commonly in the Spring, when the Cows 
are first taken from their winter food and fed with grass. It is very apt to appear 
also when they are suckling their young. But this disease it is incapable of producing 
any specific effects on the human Constitution. However, it is of the greatest con- 
sequence to point it out here, left the want of discrimination should occasion an idea 
of security from the infection of the Small Pox, which might prove delusive. ^]
[^4. * I have purposely selected several cases inwhich the disease had apperearad 
at a very distant period previous to the experiments made with variolous 
matter, to shew that the change produced in the constitution is not affected by 
time. ^]
[^5. * It is remarkable that variolous matter, when the system is disposed to reject 
it, should excite inflammation on the part to which it is applied more speedily 
than when it produces the Small Pox. Indeed it becomes almost a citerion by 
which we can determine whether the infection will be received or not. It seems 
as if a change, which endures though life, had been produced in the action, or 
disposition to action, in the vessels of the skin; and it is remarkable too, that 
whether this change has been effected by the Small Pox, or Cow Pox, that 
the disposition to sudden cuticular inflammation is the same on the application of 
variolous matter. ^]
[^6. * When the Cow Pox has prevailed in the diary, it has often been com- 
municated to those who have not milked the cows, by the handle of the milk 
pail. ^]
[^7. This is not case in general — a second attack is commonly very slight, 
and so, I am informed, it is among the cows. ^]
[^8.  It is remarkable fact, and well known to many, that we are frequently 
foiled in our endeavours to communicate the Small Pox by inoculation to 
blacksmiths, who in the country are farriers. they often, as in the above 
instance, either resist the contagnion entirely, or have the disease anomalously. 
Shall we not be able now to account for this on rational principle? ^]
[^9. * From the sore on the hand of Sarah Nelmes. — See the preceding case and 
the plate. ^]
[^10. *Perhaps a few touches with the lapis scepticus would have proved equally 
efficacious. ^]
[^11. †What effect would a similar treatment produce in inoculation for the Small- 
pox ^]
[^12. * It is very easy to produce pus from old sores on the heels of horses. This I 
have often inserted into scratches made with a lancet, on the sound nipples of 
cows, and have seen no other effects from it than simple inflammation. ^]
[^13. * See Case IX. ^]
[^14. * My friend Dr. Hicks, of Bristol, who during the prevalence of this dis- 
temper was resident at Gloucester, and Physician to the Hospital there, 
(where it was seen soon after its first appearance in this country) had opportunities 
of making numerous observations upon it, which it is his intention to commu- 
nicate to the Public. ^]
[^15. * I have been informed from respectable authority that in Ireland, although 
dairies abound in many parts of the Iseland, the disease is entirely unknown. The 
reason seems obvious. The business of the dairy is conducted by women only. 
Were the meanest vassal among the men, employed thereas a milker at a dairy, 
he would feel his situation unpleasant beyond all endurance. ^]
[^16. * See Note in Page 7. ^]